OJIBWA  TEXTS 

PART  I 


PUBLICATIONS 

of  the 

American  Ethnological  Society 
Edited  by  FRANZ  BOAS 


VOLUME  VII       Part  I 

OJIBWA   TEXTS 

COLLECTED  BY 
WILLIAM  JONES 

EDITED  BY  TRUMAN  MICHELSON 


E.  J.  BRILL,  LIMITED 

PUBLISHERS    AND    PRINTERS 

LEYDEN,   1917 
G.  E.  STECHERT  &  Co.,  NEW  YORK,  AGENTS. 


AM  * 
v-7-V 


PRINTED    BY    E.   J.    BRILL,    LEYDEN   (HOLLAND). 


OJIBVVA  TEXTS. 


CONTENTS. 


Page 

PREFACE ix 

PART  I.  --  NANABUSHU  TALES. 

SERIES  I.     Nos.  1-18. 

i.  The  Birth  of  Nanabushu 3 

„    2.  The  Theft  of  Fire 7 

3.  Nanabushu  slays  his  Younger  Brother 15 

4.  Nanabushu  kills  Another  Brother 23 

5.  Nanabushu  and  the  Winged  Startlers 41  - 

6.  Nanabushu  and  the  Dancing  Bullrushes  .     < 45  — 

7.  Nanabushu,  the  Sweet-Brier  Berries,  and  the  Sturgeons      .     .  49 

8.  Nanabushu  and  the  Wolves 73  - 

9.  Nanabushu  and  the  Wolves,  Continued 85 

10.  The  Death  of  Nanabushu's  Nephew,  the  Wolf 89 

11.  Nanabushu  breaks  the  Necks  of  the  Dancing  Geese      .     .     .  101  - 

12.  Nanabushu  eats  the  Artichokes 113 

13.  Nanabushu  and  the  Cranberries 117   - 

14.  Nanabushu  and  the  Caribou 117 

15.  Nanabushu  flies  with  the  Geese 127 

1 6.  Nanabushu  and  the  Buzzard 133 

17.  Nanabushu  pretends  to  be  a  Woman 139 

1 8.  Nanabushu  slays  Toad- Woman,  the  Healer  of  the  Manitous  .  145 

SERIES  II.     Nos.  19-32. 

^i0.  Nanabushu  and  the  Caribou 159 

20.  Nanabushu  breaks  the  Necks  of  the  Dancing  Geese      .     .     .169 

21.  Nanabushu  and  the  Cranberries 179 

22.  Nanabushu  and  the  Dancing  Bullrushes 181 

23.  Nanabushu  eats  the  Artichokes 185 

[v] 


430019 


VI 

Page 

24.  Nanabushu  and  the  Winged  Startlers 187 

qA  '25.  Nanabushu  and  the  Great  Fisher 193 

26.  Nanabushu  and  Windigo 197 

27.  Nanabushu  comforts  his  Grandmother 203 

28.  Nanabushu  swallowed  by  t^he  Sturgeon 207 

29.  Nanabushu,  the  Sweet-Brier  Berries,  and  the  Sturgeons      .     .  215 

30.  Nanabushu  and  the  Wolves 235 

31.  The  Death  of  Nanabushu's  Nephew,  the  Wolf 251 

32.  Nanabushu  slays  Toad- Woman,  the  Healer  of  the  Manitous  .  261 

SERIES  III.     Nos.  33-38. 

33.  Nanabushu  feigns  Death  to  marry  his  Sister .  279 

34.  Nanabushu  is  fed  Meat  from  the  Back  of  a  Woman     .     .     .  299 
-  35.  Nanabushu  and  the  WToodpecker 305 

36.  Nanabushu  is  Miraculously  fed  Bear-Grease 311 

i    ,        37.  Nanabushu  and  the  Mallard 317 

38.  Nanabushu  is  given  Power  by  the  Skunk,  but  wastes  it     .     .  321 

SERIES  IV.     No.  39. 

39.  Nanabushu  and  Soaring-Eagle 331 

SERIES  V.     Nos.  40-42. 

.   40.  Nanabushu  is  Miraculously  fed  Bear-Grease 341 

^  41.  Nanabus'hu  and  the  Mallard 351 

_  42.  Nanabushu  and  the  Woodpecker 357 

SERIES  VI.     No.  43. 

43.  Nanabushu  hunts  Buffalo  with  his  Younger  Brother      .     .     .  363 
SERIES  VII.     Nos.  44-56. 

—  44.  Nanabushu  and  the  Wolves 373 

^  45.  The  Death  of  Nanabushu's  Nephew 389 

,46.  Nanabushu  slays  Toad- Woman,  the  Healer  of  the  Manitous  .  399 

47.  The  Scattering  of  the  Animals  and  the  Regulation  of  Nature  407 

—  48.  Nanabushu  breaks  the  Necks  of  the  Dancing  Geese      .     .     .  409 

49.  Nanabushu  and  the  Little  Fishers 413 

50.  Nanabushu  and  the  Ruffed  Grouse 415 

51.  Nanabushu  and  the  Moose-Head 415 

^52.  Nanabushu  is  Miraculously  fed  Bear-Grease 421 

53.  Nanabushu  and  the  Woodpecker 423 

54.  Nanabushu  marries 423 

55.  The  Origin  of  Likenesses  of  Nanabushu 429 

56.  Nanabushu  flies  with  the  Geese 433 


VII 


SERIES  VIII.     Nos.  57-63. 

57.  Nanabushu  and  the  Fish-Trap 437 

58.  Nanabushu  obscenely  jests  with  his  Grandmother     ....  447 

59.  Nanabushu  finds  Cranberries  and  Big  Cherries 449 

60.  Nanabushu  is  made  to  fast  by  his  Grandmother,  and  revenges 

Himself    .     .  ' 451 

6 1.  Nanabushu  swallowed  by  the  Sturgeon 467 

62.  Nanabushu  slays  Hewer-of-his-Shin 483 

63.  Nanabushu  leaves  his  Brother,  and  also  his  Grandmother .     .  495 


PREFACE. 

THE  material  contained  in  the  present  volume  represents 
part  of  the  results  obtained  by  the  late  William  Jones  in 
his  work  undertaken  under  the  auspices  of  the  Carnegie 
Institution  during  the  years  1903,  1904,  and  1905.  During 
this  period  Dr.  Jones  was  research  assistant  at  the  Carnegie 
Institution,  and  he  was  charged  with  the  study  of  the 
Ojibwa  tribes.  Most  of  his  investigations  were  carried  on 
north  of  Lake  Superior.  During  the  year  1906,  when  he 
was  still  engaged  in  working  up  the  results  obtained  during 
the  journeys  undertaken  for  the  Carnegie  Institution,  he 
accepted  a  position  in  the  Anthropological  Department 
of  the  Field  Museum  of  Natural  History,  Chicago. 

He  was  immediately  sent  to  the  Philippine  Islands  to 
collect  and  study  on  behalf  of  the  Museum.  He  took 
his  manuscript  material  along,  hoping  to  work  on  it  in 
spare  moments.  During  his  researches  in  the  Philippine 
Islands  he  was  killed  by  the  natives,  and  the  manuscript 
material  lay  for  a  long  time  buried  in  Manila.  Finally 
the  Field  Museum  of  Natural  History  sent  a  member  of 
its  staff,  Mr.  S.  C.  Simms,  to  rescue  Dr.  Jones's  collections. 
He  also  found  the  manuscript  which,  at  the  request  of 
Professor  Boas,  was  turned  over  to  him  by  the  Carnegie 
Institution  for  the  purpose  of  reporting  on  its  condition. 
An  agreement  was  reached  between  Professor  Boas  and 
the  Carnegie  Institution  by  which  the  Institution  undertook 
to  contribute  to  the  expense  of  printing  the  collections. 
Professor  Boas  also  obtained  the  co-operation  of  the 

IX 


American  Ethnological  Society,  and  the  editorial  work  on 
the  collections  was  entrusted  to  the  undersigned. 

In  the  papers  left  by  Dr.  Jones  the  following  prefatory 
note  was  found,  which  explains  his  plan  of  publication. 

"The  work  presented  in  the  following  pages  is  the  trans 
lation  of  a  body  of  material  that  was  taken  down  in  text 
from  several  dialects  of  an  Algonkin  people  called  the 
Ojibwa.  It  was  originally  the  purpose  to  bring  out  this 
translation  at  the  same  time  with  the  text,  but  circum 
stances  of  various  sorts  have  interfered  with  this  plan  :  in 
consequence  the  offer  of  the  texts  for  publication  will  be 
postponed.  It  is  the  plan  to  present  with  these  texts  a 
linguistic  introduction  dealing  with  the  phonetics,  morphol 
ogy,  and  syntax  of  the  Ojibwa  language,  together  with 
a  dictionary  of  stems  to  the  same.  Much  work  has  already 
been  done  toward  the  fulfilment  of  this  end,  but  it  is  not 
yet  in  a  form  to  justify  its  publication. 

"With  this  translation  is  an  introduction  treating  of  the 
material  culture  of  the  Ojibwas :  it  will  serve  as  a  means 
of  rendering  the  narratives  more  intelligible.  The  narra 
tives  contain  myth,  primitive  lore,  sayings,  and  a  good 
deal  else  bearing  largely  on  the  religious  sentiment ;  they 
also  contain  traditional  matter,  some  of  which  may  be 
classed  as  historical.  On  account  of  the  heterogeneous 
character  of  the  work,  it  is  hardly  possible  to  present  it 
in  an  orderly  sequence.  The  plan  of  the  present  arrange 
ment  has  been  to  group  together  as  near  as  possible  the 
parts  that  have  an  intimate  connection ;  as,  for  example, 
tales  that  are  variants  of  one  another,  or  that  have  elements 
of  a  similar  character,  or  that  belong  psychologically  in 
a  class  by  themselves.  For  this  reason  it  has  seemed  best 
to  break  up  some  of  the  long  narratives  as  given  by  the 
informants,  and  to  mass  together  such  parts  of  them  as 


XI 


deal  with  the  same  episodes.  This  arrangement  readily 
offers  means  for  an  immediate  comparison  of  the  various 
forms  in  which  a  common  tale  is  told. 

"The  work  is  to  be  taken  largely  as  an  attempt  to  get 
at  the  religious  ideas  of  a  people  from  their  own  point 
of  view.  As  this  point  of  view  can  be  expressed  only 
in  terms  of  their  own  language,  naturally  the  linguistic 
method  had  to  be  employed  in  the  investigation.  A 
speaker's  own  words  were  put  down  in  text ;  and,  since 
the  object  was  not  to  find  how  well  a  narrative  could  be 
told,  never  was  a  version  repeated  a  second  time  by  the 
one  who  gave  it.  The  form  of  the  story  in  the  text  is 
that  which  the  speaker  told  but  once,  at  the  first  dictation. 

Simplicity  is  a  characteristic  mark  of  the  narratives 
throughout :  they  run  along  with  such  an  even,  quiet  pace, 
that  they  leave  an  impression  of  dull  monotony.  They 
are  told  off  in  a  matter-of-fact  way,  and  conscious  effort 
at  rhetorical  effect  is  feeble.  The  rare  use  of  figures  of 
speech,  and  the  sudden  turning  of  phrases  for  springing 
surprise,  are  suggestive  facts,  especially  from  the  point  of 
view  of  the  form  and  construction  of  a  narrative.  Repe 
tition  is  frequent,  not  only  of  an  idea,  but  of  an  expres 
sion  :  stereotyped  phrases  constantly  recur,  verbs  of  saying, 
quotatives,  and  introductive  adverbs  being  especially 
common.  Quotatives  have  been  in  some  cases  difficult 
to  handle,  and  equally  as  much  trouble  was  given  by 
introductive  adverbs. 

"The  language  of  most  of  the  material  is  conversational; 
the  periods  are  short;  sentences  colloquial,  seldom  sustained, 
and  often  loose  and  incoherent.  Vagueness  of  reference 
is  common.  The  unconscious  assumption  on  the  part  of 
the  narrator  that  one  is  familiar  with  the  background  of 
a  narrative,  is  one  cause  why  so  many  of  the  statements, 
when  taken  as  they  stand,  are  unintelligible.  This  vague- 


XII 

ness  of  effect  is  helped  along  by  the  tendency  to  abbre 
viated  expression,  -  -  such  as  the  frequent  occurrence  of 
a  quotation  without  mention  of  the  speaker,  and  the 
presence  of  subjects  and  objects  without  verbs,  -  -  thus 
rendering  sentences  often  extremely  elliptical. 

"Other  causes  have  operated  in  rendering  the  sense 
uncertain ;  such,  for  instance,  as  the  interruption  of  the 
sequence  of  a  passage,  the  interruption  being  due  to  the 
sudden  appearance  of  persons  for  one  cause  or  another, 
or  whose  presence  was  desirable,  or  to  the  response  of 
some  call,  domestic,  social,  or  ceremonial.  In  a  less 
degree,  the  uncertainty  of  the  sense  of  a  passage  has 
been  due  to  the  delay  in  translation. 

"The  language  is  spoken  in  word-sentences,  and  the 
rendering  in  English  is  generally  longer.  In  a  passage 
capable  of  more  than  one  rendering,  preference  is  given 
to  the  shorter.  The  inchoative  character  of  a  verb  is 
always  present,  despite  the  fact  that  it  may  not  be  expli 
citly  expressed  in  the  stem.  This  inchoative  sense  is  not 
always  brought  out  in  the  translation  •,  in  particular,  if  the 
omission  is  not  likely  to  interfere  with  the  general  meaning 
of  a  passage.  As  already  stated,  the  English  equivalent 
is  generally  longer  than  the  original,  and  it  has  been  the 
object  to  keep  the  length  of  the  translation  back  as  near 
as  possible  to  that  of  the  original.  Frequently,  however, 
the  inchoative  would  be  superfluous  in  the  English  idiom, 
hence  in  such  instances  it  is  left  unexpressed  in  the  trans 
lation.  A  common  peculiarity  is  met  with  in  the  inception 
of  an  inchoative,  a  beginning-to-do  or  a  beginning-to-be. 
It  is  enough  in  English  to  say  that  'he  commenced  his  work,' 
or  that  'he  started  to  grow  in  stature:'  but  it  is  common 

o 

in  Ojibwa  to  say  that  'he  began  to  commence  his  work,'  or 
that  'he  began  to  start  to  grow  in  stature.'  The  inception 
of  this  inchoative  is  seldom  expressed  in  the  translation. 


XIII 


"It  was  the  plan  to  have  the  translation  run  as  near  as 
possible  with  the  order  of  the  ideas  of  the  text ;  but  this 
could  not  be  maintained  except  within  approximate  limits. 
But  with  few  exceptions,  it  was  possible  to  keep  the 
grammar  of  the  translation  close  to  that  of  the  text. 
Where  there  was  departure  from  the  grammatical  structure 
of  the  original,  it  was  in  cases  where  the  sense  would 
have  been  left  in  doubt  if  fidelity  to  syntax  was  adhered 
to :  as,  for  example,  the  matter  of  plurality,  which  the 
Ojibwa  often  expressed  by  the  use  of  singular  nouns  and 
verbs,  but  which  in  the  translation  are  rendered  according 
to  sense ;  or  when  a  passive  could  best  be  rendered  by 
an  active  form,  a  personal  by  an  impersonal,  a  transitive 
by  an  intransitive.  Furthermore,  the  inchoative  character 
of  verbs  is  not  always  shown  in  the  translation. 

"The  language  contains  grammatical  gender,  animate  and 
inanimate.  It  may  be  said,  that,  as  a  rule,  the  animate 
refers  to  everything  having  the  quality  of  life  and  move 
ment  ;  while  the  inanimate  refers  to  all  things  without 
those  qualities.  'Being'  or  'creature'  would  be  a  general 
rendering  of  the  animate,  while  'thing'  would  express  the 
inanimate.  It  has  been  found  best  in  the  translation  to 
express  gender  somewhat  as  follows :  animate  as  masculine, 
unless  from  the  context  the  gender  is  feminine;  and  in 
animate  as  neuter. 

"Pronouns  of  the  second  person  singular  are  rendered 
according  to  the  English  idiom ;  viz.,  'thou'  and  'thine' 
into  'you'  and  'yours.'  The  form  of  the  verb  with  the 
pronoun  'you'  is  made  to  take  the  place  of  the  more 
consistent  'thou.' 

"The  plural  of  the  first  person  in  Ojibwa  is  treated  dif 
ferently  from  the  way  it  is  in  English.  In  Ojibwa  it  is 
expressed  in  the  terms  of  relationship  which  the  speaker 
bears  to  the  other  two  persons :  hence  there  are  two  sets 


XIV 

* 

of  forms,  -  -  one  including  the  first  and  second  persons ; 
and  another,  the  first  and  third  persons.  This  distinction 
is  not  maintained  in  the  translation :  it  has  not  seemed 
necessary  except  in  a  few  instances,  for  purposes  of 
clearness. 

"The  paragraphs  of  the  translation  correspond  to  those 
in  the  text.  Punctuation  in  both  text  and  translation  is 
the  same  for  periods,  colons,  semicolons,  and  interrogation- 
signs,  but  irregular  for  commas  and  exclamation-marks. 
It  has  been  found  necessary,  for  purposes  of  clearness,  to 
use  commas  in  the  translation  where  they  are  absent  in 
the  text. 

"An  effort  was  made  to  keep  the  translation  as  free  as 
possible  of  Ojibwa  words ;  but  this  could  not  be  done 
absolutely,  on  account  of  the  doubtful  meaning  of  many 
terms  (such  as  proper  names) ;  and  in  the  introduction  it 
was  found  necessary  to  give  names  of  places,  people, 
groups  of  people,  and  the  like.  The  spelling  of  Ojibwa 
words  in  the  translation  does  not  always  conform  exactly 
to  the  orthography  here  shown.  The  vowels  are  about 
the  same,  but  the  consonantal  sounds  are  about  as  they 
would  generally  be  expressed  in  English. 

VOWELS. 

"The  vowels  have  their  continental  values,  and  their 
quantity  is  indicated  by  symbols.  Thus :  - 

u  .  .  .  .  like  u  in  /////. 

u  .  .  .  .  long,  like  the  vowel-sound  in  loon. 

o  .  .  .  .  like  o  in  fellow. 

o  .  .  .  .  long,  like  o  in  no. 

a  ....  like  the  vowel-sound  in  hut. 

a  ....  like  the  vowel-sound  in  not. 

a  ....  long,  like  a  in  alms. 

a  ....  broad,  like  a  in  all. 

a  .         .  like  the  vowel-sound  in  sham. 


XV 

e  .  .  .  .  like  e  in  men. 

e  .  .  .  .  long,  like  the  a  in  tale. 

i  .  ...  like  z  in  sit. 

i  .  .  .  .  shorter  than  the  i  in  sit. 

1  ....  long,  like  the  vowel-sound  in  see. 

DIPHTHONGS. 

"The  combination  of  two  vowels  into  one  sound  is  not 
frequent.  There  are  probably  but  two  clear  diphthongs  :  - 

ai    ....  like  the  diphthong  in  my. 
au  .  .  .  .  like  the  diphthong  in  shout. 

"The  movement  of  the  voice  off  a  long  vowel  is  down 
ward  ;  hence  o  and  ~e  sometimes  sound  as  if  they  might 
be  ou  and  'e1,  where  ou  would  be  almost  like  the  diphthong 
in  toe,  and  ~el  like  the  diphthong  in  day. 

CONSONANTS. 

2  ....  a  soft  glottal  stop. 

'     ....  a   Greek   spiritus   asper  denoting  a  whispered  continuant  before 

/i,  k,  t  and  p. 
h  .  .  .  .  like  h  in  hall. 

'£....-.  like  h,  but  with  a  whisper  preceding. 
£  ....  like  the  /£-sound  in  call. 

'/&....  like  k,  but  with  a  whisper  before  articulation. 
£...•;  like  g  in  go. 

x  .  .  .  .  like  ch  in  German  Bach,  but  less  feeble. 
£..-..  like  sh  in  j//£. 
j   .  .  .  .  like  the  French  /  in  jour. 
s   .  .  .  .  like  the  sound  in  English,  but  made  with  the  tongue  against  the 

lower  teeth. 

5   .  .  .  .  like  the  z  in  zero, 
tc  .  .  .  .  like  ^  in  charm, 
dc .  .  .  .  like  /  in  June. 
t   .  .  .  .  like  /  in  tea. 

V  ....  like  /,  but  with  a  whisper  before  articulation. 
d  .  .  .  .  like  d  in  day. 
;/....  like  the  same  sound  in  English. 
p  .  .  .  .  like  p  in  pen. 


XVI 


'/....  like  p,  but  with  a  whisper  preceding. 

b  .  .  .  .  like  b  in  boy. 

m  .  .  .  .  like  the  sound  in  English. 

y  .  .  .  .  like  y  in  jy<?&. 

w  .  .  .  .  like  w  in  war. 

"The    consonants    can    be   graphically  shown  in   tabular 
view  thus  :  — 


Stops. 

Spirants  and 
affricatives. 

Nas; 

I 

Surd. 

Sonant. 

Surd. 

Sonant. 

Glottal  

8 

• 

Post-palatal  

k 

g 

X 

Palatal  

<k 

Alveolar  

c,  tc 

s,  ts 

j,  dc  2 
z,  ds  ' 

Dental  

t    <t 

d 

n 
m 

Labial  

P    'P 

b 

h,  <h,  w 

y 

UI  am  indebted  to  many  who  have  lent  aid  in  furthering 
the  work,  -  -  to  many  Ojibwas,  among  whom  may  first 
be  mentioned  the  names  of  five  whose  narratives  are  here 
in  translation.  By  accident  they  all  happen  to  be  of  the 
Bull-Head  totem.  First  is  Mrs.  Marie  Syrette  of  Fort 
William,  Ontario.  She  grew  up  at  Lake  Nipigon,  where 
dwell  Ojibwas  of  Lake  Superior,  arid  to  which  place  come 
those  that  live  on  the  height  of  land  and  along  the  rivers 
flowing  towards  Hudson  Bay.  She  is  well  versed  in  the 

1  The    nasal    of   this  series  is  found  only  before  g  and  /£,  and  hence  transcribed 
by    the    dental  nasal,  n.     Nasal  vowels  are  indicated  by  a  superior  n.     The  Ojibwa 
surds    are    not   aspirated    as    in    English.      Superior    vowels    following    other    vowels 
indicate  weakly  articulated  sonant  vowels.  —  T.  M. 

2  Better  dj.  —   T.  M.  3  Better  dz.  —  T.  M. 


XVII 


lore  of  all  these  people.  In  Ojibwa  she  is  called  Kiigi- 
gepinasi'kwa  ('Forever-Bird-Woman').  Next  is  John  Pinesi 
(Penessi,  Penassie),  chief  of  the  Fort  William  Ojibwas. 
No  name  is  better  spoken  of  or  more  widely  known  by 
the  Canadian  Ojibwas  than  that  of  this  fine,  old  man. 
His  surname  comes  from  an  abbreviation  of  his  Ojibwa 
name,  which  is  Kagige  pinasi  ('Forever-Bird'),  and  by 
that  name  he  is  more  familiarly  known.  He  knows  the 
Ojibwas  from  Manitoulin  Island  to  the  Sault,  and  all  that 
live  along  the  north  shore  of  Lake  Superior  to  Grand 
Marais.  He  has  been  among  those  who  live  on  Rainy- 
River,  Lake  of  the  Woods,  and  those  who  live  on  the 
height  of  land ;  but  he  is  more  familiar  with  the  Ojibwas 
that  inhabit  the  shore  country  between  Kanustiquia  River 
and  the  Sault,  for  it  was  in  this  vast  region  that  lay  the 
scenes  and  experiences  of  his  life,  from  childhood  to  old 
age.  The  third  is  Wasagunackang  ("He-that-leaves-the- 
Imprint-of-his-Foot-shining-in-the-Snow").  He  is  now  an 
old  man,  bent  with  age,  living  at  Pelican  Lake,  near  the 
Bois  Fort  Reservation,  in  Minnesota.  He  grew  up  on 
Rainy  River,  Rainy  Lake,  and  the  Lake  of  the  Woods. 
The  fourth  is  his  nephew,  Midasuganj  ('Ten-Claw'),  living 
at  Bois  Fort.  He  visits  with  the  Red  Lake  Ojibwas  on 
the  west,  and  with  those  of  Rainy  River  on  the  north 
and  east.  He  is  a  man  of  middle  age,  of  strong  physique, 
energetic,  well  built,  intelligent,  and  of  the  number  fre 
quently  called  upon  to  take  leading  part  in  ceremony. 
The  last  is  Madcfgabo  ('Begins-to-Rise-to-his-Feet').  He 
is  chief  of  the  Bear  Island  Ojibwas  of  Leech  Lake  in 
Minnesota.  Unfortunately  but  two  of  his  narratives  appear 
in  the  collection.  His  help  was  utilized  in  another  way,  - 
in  going  rapidly  over  the  whole  collection  to  see  what 
was  familiar  to  his  group  of  Ojibwas,  and  what  was  not. 
To  be  mentioned  with  him  in  this  connection  is  Nigani- 


XVIII 


pinas  (*Bird-on- Ahead'),  the  head  chief  of  the  Pillager 
Ojibwas,  of  Leech  Lake,  Minnesota.  He  is  better  known 
by  the  whites  under  the  name  of  Flat-Mouth,  the 

name  of  his  father,  who  was  one  of  the  great  chiefs  ot 
the  Ojibwas.  He  is  also  of  the  Bull-Head  totem.  Flat- 
Mouth  was  exceedingly  helpful.  It  can  be  said  that  for 
acquaintance  and  knowledge  he  is  to  the  Ojibwas  west 
and  northwest  of  Lake  Superior  what  Forever-Bird  is  to 
those  of  the  north  shore  of  Lake  Superior.  He  is  probably 
more  familiar  with  the  Ojibwas  south  of  Lake  Superior 
than  Forever-Bird  is  with  the  Ojibwas  of  Manitoulin  Island 
and  thereabouts.  He  has  journeyed  back  and  forth  for 
years  between  Leech  Lake  and  the  Lake  of  the  Woods, 
stopping  for  long  periods  at  a  time  at  Red  Lake,  Rainy 
River,  and  Rainy  Lake.  He  practises  magic,  soothsaying, 
and  is  one  of  the  foremost  members  of  the  mystic  rite. 
He  was  acquainted  with  all  the  materials  of  the  text,  and 
was  familiar  with  the  various  peculiarities  of  dialect.  Texts 
from  him  and  Begins-to-Rise-to-his-Feet  would  have  com 
pleted  the  circuit  I  had  set  out  to  make,  -  -  a  circuit  that 
would  have  contained  practically  all  the  important  tales 
known  among  the  Ojibwas,  wherever  they  are  found ; 
but,  under  circumstances  of  the  moment,  I  had  to  rest 
content  with  the  service  which  they  kindly  gave  in  checking 
up  what  I  had  already  gathered. 

"To  three  English-speaking  Ojibwas  I  am  under  obligations 
for  the  help  they  gave  in  a  more  restricted  sense,  -  -  to 
Mrs.  Milise  Millet,  the  daughter  of  Mrs.  Marie  Syrette, 
of  Fort  William,  Ontario ;  to  Joseph  Morrison  of  White 
Earth  (?) ;  and  to  William  Butcher  of  Leech  Lake,  Minne 
sota.  The  aid  rendered  by  them  individually  was  not 
quite  the  same  in  each  case.  Mrs.  Millet  was  quick  at 
syntax.  Morrison  was  proficient  in  throwing  into  idiomatic 
English  the  meaning  of  an  Ojibwa  passage.  In  this  partic- 


XIX 

ular  sense,  he  is  probably  the  ablest  interpreter  of  Ojibvva 
now  to  be  found.  Butcher's  familiarity  with  the  life  of 
the  old-time  people  and  with  the  background  of  the  material 
of  the  text  was  of  great  assistance.  It  was  of  a  world 
that  he  knew  well,  and  for  which  he  had  a  sympathetic 
feeling  (in  it  he  had  been  reared),  and  of  which  he  had 
become  so  much  a  part  that  it  was  easy  for  him  to 
interpret  in  terms  of  that  experience. 

"I  take  this  opportunity  of  acknowledging  the  many 
courtesies  extended  me  by  officials  of  the  Canadian  Pacific, 
Great  Northern,  and  Northwestern  Railroads.  To  Dr. 
George  A.  Dorsey,  Curator  of  Anthropology  of  the  Field 
Museum  of  Natural  History  at  Chicago,  and  to  Dr.  Clark 
Wissler,  Curator  of  Anthropology  of  the  American  Museum 
of  Natural  History  at  New  York,  I  am  indebted  for 
generous  assistance  kindly  given  at  various  times  in  various 
ways.'  I  cannot  leave  unmentioned  the  name  of  the  late 
William  Wells  Newell,  who  watched  the  work  with  lively 
interest  from  its  very  beginning.  It  was  his  desire  that 
the  work  be  brought  out  by  the  Cambridge  Branch  of 
the  American  Folk-Lore  Society,  on  account  of  the  fact 
that  in  the  texts  were  the  myths  from  which  Longfellow 
derived  the  materials  for  the  'Song  of  Hiawatha/  I  am 
under  special  obligations  to  Professor  Franz  Boas  of  Co 
lumbia  University  for  his  constant  assistance  at  all  times, 
and  for  the  kindly  interest  he  took  in  the  work  from  the 
very  beginning.  He  pointed  out  the  field,  suggested  lines 
of  investigation,  provided  means  for  carrying  on  the  work  : 
hence  to  him  is  largely  due  whatever  results  the  work 
may  have  for  the  scientific  study  of  the  lore  of  a  primi 
tive  people." 

Circumstances  have  forced  me  to  modify  Dr.  Jones's 
original  plan.  It  has  seemed  best,  after  long  delay,  to 


XX 

bring    out    both    text    and    translation,    and  to   postpone   a 
vocabulary  and  grammatical  discussion  till  a  future  time. 

The  editor  decided  to  abandon  the  arrangement  of  the 
tales  according  to  the  method  suggested  by  Dr.  Jones, 
and  to  give  the  tales  rather  in  the  order  in  which  they 
were  told.  By  doing  so,  the  individuality  of  each  narrator 
could  be  brought  out  more  clearly.  So  far  as  is  at  present 
known,  the  provenience  and  authorship  of  the  tales  are 
as  follows :  - 

Series  i  (Nos.      1-18).     Bois  Fort:   Wasagunackank. 

Series  2  (Nos    19-32).     Bois  Fort:  probably  Midasuga'J. 

Series  3  (Nos.  33-38).     Bois  Fort:  probably  Midasuga'j. 

Series  4  (No.  39).     Bois  Fort :  Wasagunackank. 

Series  5  (Nos.  40-42).     Bois  Fort :  probably  Wasagunackank. 

Series  6  (No.  43).     Leech  Lake :  Madcigabo. 

Series  7  (Nos.  44-56).     Fort  William:  Penessi. 

Series  8  (Nos.  57-63).     Fort  William  :  Mrs.  Syrette. 

It  should  be  expressly  noted  that  Dr.  Jones  had  con 
templated  publishing  the  Indian  text  later,  not  in  conjunc 
tion  with  the  English  translation.  Doubtless  he  would 
have  revised  it ;  for  a  critical  examination  shows  that  these 
Ojibwa  texts  are  especially  valuable  for  their  literary,  and 
less  so  for  their  phonetic,  accuracy.  Yet,  on  the  whole, 
it  seemed  entirely  feasible  to  print  the  texts  as  he  left  them. 

It  may  not  be  inappropriate  to  outline  here  my  task. 
The  first  thing  to  determine  was  what  Indian  originals 
corresponded  with  the  English  translations ;  and,  secondly, 
to  harmonize  their  paragraphing  and  punctuation,  for  it 
appeared  Dr.  Jones's  plans  regarding  them  (vide  supra) 
had  not  been  carried  out.  I  have  revised  the  Indian  text 
of  Part  II  and  inserted  the  proper  diacritical  marks  on 
the  basis  of  Dr.  Jones's  field-notes,  as  it  was  apparent 
that  the  typewritten  copy  was  made  by  a  person  who 
had  no  knowledge  of  Ojibwa.  Where  these  field-notes 
have  failed  me  (happily,  in  only  a  few  instances),  I  have 


XXI 

relied  on  Ojibwa  informants  and  my  own  slight  knowledge 
of  Ojibwa.  Here  and  there  some  phrases  which  were 
left  untranslated  by  Dr.  Jones  have  been  translated  by 
me  on  the  basis  of  Dr.  Jones's  note-books.  Where  I  am 
wholly  responsible  for  the  translation,  a  footnote  will 
show  it. 

The  contents  of  Part  I  contain  little,  if  any,  new  material 
for  Ojibwa  mythology.  The  works  of  Schoolcraft,  Kohl, 
Radin,  De  Jong,  cover  more  or  less  the  same  ground. 
Skinner's  "Notes  on  the  Eastern  Cree  and  Northern  Saul- 
teaux"  should  also  be  mentioned  in  this  connection. 

Part  II  of  the  "Ojibwa  Texts"  is  in  press,  and  it  is 
hoped  that  it  may  be  issued  soon.  Another  volume, 
dealing  with  Ojibwa  ethnology,  is  being  prepared  by  me 
for  publication  by  the  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology. 

The  following  papers  have  been  issued,  based  on  Dr. 
Jones's  manuscript  material :  — 

Notes   on   Fox  Indians  (Journal  of  American  Folk-Lore,  Vol.  XXIV, 

pp.  209-237). 
Ojibwa  Tales  from  the  North  Shore  of  Lake  Superior  (Ibid.,  Vol.  XXIX, 

pp.  368-391)- 
Kickapoo  Tales  (Publications  of  the  American  Ethnological  Society, 

Vol.  IX,  143  PP-). 

TRUMAN  MICHELSON. 

Washington,  D.C., 
November,  1916. 


OJIBWA  TEXTS 

BY 

WILLIAM  JONES 
Edited  by  TRUMAN  MICHELSON 


I — PUHL.    AMER.    ETIIN.    SOC.    VOL.    VII. 


I.  -      NANABUSHU  TALES. 

SERIES  I.     Nos,   1-18. 
i.  THE  BIRTH  OF  NANABUSHU. 

Uwlgiwamiwag  anicinabag,  mindimoya11  udanisan  uwidi- 
gaman.  Ninguting  uganonan  Ini/u  udanisan :  "Ambasano 
nindanis  aiyangwamizin.  Wlnondawicin  ka/rninan.  Kagiitsa 
ningitciku'tatc,  kinanlsananimin.  Kagu  wl'ka  ijitcika'kan 
5  owiti  nlngabra'nung  tciinasamapiyan  saga'a-man.1  Kago 
klga'iji'a'ya  klcpin  'i^widi  inasamapiyan.  Mri'wisa  ajina- 
msananiminan.  Aiyangwamisin  4ici/u  nongumaninan  tcri'jio 
tcigayan  ;  kiga'i'niga'ton  klya/u.  Mlsai  iu  aninan." 


Anic  misagu  iu,  anic  misa  ka^a't  aiyangwamisigobanan 
10  4aca/u  i'kwa  wackinlgi4kwawit.2  Kawm  wi'ka  ininiwan  pacu7 
oglwabamasin.  Ningutingigu  ka/i'ciwaniwisit  a11  uckinlgi- 
'kwa ;  mldac  alpl  saga'a'mugubanan  ka-iji'i*nasamabit  nm- 
gabl'a'nung  mldac  a'pl  nondamugubanan  pldwawayanima- 
tinig.  Kaijiki'kandank  ta'kacit  i'i'widi  osaga'a'mowining.3 

1   Saga'a'man,  "when  you  go  out,"   a  euphemistic  expression. 

-  Wackimgi'kwawit,   "who  was   a  maiden,"   or   "a  woman  young  in  years." 

W 


I.  —  NANABUSHU  TALES. 

SERIES  I.     Nos.  i-iS. 
i.  THE  BIRTH  OF  NANABUSHU. 

In  a  wigwam  lived  some  people,  an  old  woman  with 
her  daughter  dwelt.  Once  she  spoke  to  her  daughter, 
saying:  "I  beg  of  you,  my  daughter,  be  on  your  guard. 
I  would  have  you  listen  to  what  I  am  going  to  tell  you. 
Verily,  am  I  greatly  afraid,  I  am  in  fear  for  you.  Never 
bring  to  pass  when  you  go  out l  that  you  sit  facing  toward 
this  westward  way.  Something  will  happen  to  you  if 
toward  that  way  you  sit  facing.  That  is  what  causes  me 
to  entertain  fears  for  you.  Be  careful  to  give  heed  to 
that  which  I  now  tell  you  to  do  ;  (or  else)  you  will  bring 
(an  evil)  fate  upon  yourself.  Now  that  was  what  I  had 
to  tell  you." 

Now  such  was  the  way  it  was,  for  it  was  true  that  at 
the  time  heedful  was  this  woman  who  was  a  maiden.2 
Never  with  men  had  she  intimate  association.  But  once 
on  a  time  unmindful  became  the  maiden ;  so  when  out 
of  doors  she  went  (and)  afterwards  sat  down  facing  the 
west,  then  heard  she  the  sound  of  wind  coming  hither- 
ward.  When  she  felt  it,  she  was  chilled  there  at  the 
place  of  the  passage  out.3  Accordingly  she  quickly  leaped 

3  Osaga'a-mowining,  "at  the  place  of  the  passage  out,"  a  euphemistic  expression 
for  the  vulva. 

[3] 


Mldac  ajipasigundcisat.      "Nimama,  nackaginm,  ka'ijra/ya- 
yan !   mlganabatc  ka/i  jiyan  ajra/yayan." 

Ka'ijikanonat  a*a'u  mindimoya  lni/u  udanisan:  "Mamin- 
daga  gigrrniga'ton  klya/u."  Anlc  misa  iu  cigwa  gimawit 
5  au  mindimoya.  "Anlc  mlgu  iu  nindanis,  Iniga'toyan  klya/u. 
Nackaguta  ka'ijiwabisiyan.  Awiya  klpindigawag  klyawing, 
mlgu  iu  nindanis,  Inigasiyan.  Kawm  anicinabawisiwag  ka- 
'pindigawad  imasa  giyawing.  Kawln  wasa  iu  tcinlgiwad. 
Na,  mldac  Igiu  kagusagwa." 


10  Anlc  nackadac  kumagu  ya'pi  misagu  kinondawat  a*a-wisa 
mindamoya  awlya  madwagi'kandinit.  Uglki'kanima  ana- 
maya'rtanwawataminit.  Midac  mojag  klmawit  'aV11  min 
dimoya.  Mldac  kaga't  i'i'ma  klkwaya'kwanimat  tcipima- 
disisinit  Ini/u  udanisan.  Anlc  oglnondawasa  ;ici/u  ga'kandinit, 

15  'iYma  umisadaning  tanwawataminit.  lO8o/widac  madwai- 
'kidowan  :  "Nln  ningasazi'kis."  l 


"Kawin,"    madwai'kito    paejik    blnicigu    i'kido   au  paejik : 
"Kawln   kidazazlkisisl.      Ninisa  ningasazikis. 

Anlc    mlsa'pana    mawit    au    mindimoya    pisindawat    Wu 
20  ga'kandinit.      Uglkikanima    a11    mindimoya    'iY11    watacinit 
4^/uu-  o-cicanya8. 

Na,    mldac    'i£i/u  a'kidowat  nagawabinitlwat  (ayani)  ana- 
wisaga'a-mowat.      Igiwidac    anind    anugrr'kitowag :    "Kagu 
pina!   kiga'i'niga'a-nan  kuca  kimamanan.      Wawani  pinagu 
25   saga'a  nda,"  anirr'kidowag. 

1  Ningasazikis,    "I    want    to  be  the  first  brought  forth;"   more  literally,   "I  want 
to  be  the  eldest." 


to  her  feet.  "O  my  mother,  behold  the  state  that  I  am 
in  !  It  may  be  that  what  you  told  me  of  is  the  matter 
with  me." 

Then  spoke  the  old  woman  to  her  daughter,  saying : 
"Exceeding  harm  have  you  done  to  yourself."  So  there 
fore  then  did  the  old  woman  weep.  "Now  therefore,  my 
daughter,  have  you  done  yourself  a  hurt.  You  shall  learn 
what  will  happen  to  you.  Certain  beings  have  entered 
into  your  body :  therefore,  my  daughter,  you  are  in  a 
pitiable  state.  They  are  not  human  beings  that  have 
gone  inside  of  you  there.  The  time  is  not  far  distant 
before  they  will  be  born.  Therefore  it  was  they  whom 
I  feared."  " 

Now,  lo,  in  the  course  of  time  did  the  old  women  hear 
the  sound  of  beings  that  were  quarrelling  one  with  another. 
She  knew  by  the  sound  of  their  voices  that  they  were 
inside.  And  so  without  ceasing  did  the  old  woman  weep. 
It  was  true  that  then  was  she  sure  that  her  daughter 
would  not  live.  Now  she  heard  them  quarrelling  one 
with  another,  there  in  her  (daughter's)  belly  the  sound  of 
their  voices  could  be  heard.  This  was  what  one  was 
heard  to  say:  "I  wish  to  be  the  first  brought  forth."1 

"No,"  one  was  heard  saying,  even  did  one  say,  "you 
cannot  be  the  first-born.  I  am  the  one  to  be  the  eldest." 

It  was  natural  that  all  the  while  the  old  woman  should 
weep  as  she  listened  to  them  quarrelling  one  with  another. 
Knowledge  of  them  had  the  old  woman  as  to  how  many 
would  her  grandchildren  be. 

Hark !  this  was  what  they  said  as  they  pushed  one 
another  back  from  the  place  where  they  tried  in  vain  to 
go  out.  But  others  of  them  tried,  but  to  no  purpose,  to 
say:  "Don't,  please!  We  shall  surely  do  injury  to  our 
mother.  In  proper  order  please  let  us  go  out,"  (thus)  in 
vain  they  said. 


Kawmdac    ijiminwadanziwag  igi/u  wasazi'kizitcig.      Midac 

'ici/u    a/kidowat  cigwa  anotcigu  wrrjisaga'armowad.      Pajik 

ugiwabandan    wasa'kunanig.      "Anlc    mrrma    kwaya'k    nln 

wa/ijayan."      Midac    a'pi    klkagwatanimitiwad    awanan    a11 

5   ni'tam     kasaga'a'nk,     mldac     iu    ka'i'jiplguckawawad    ini/u 


umama'i'wan.1 


Wi'kagu  ningutci  papa'i'nabit  mindimoya  ugimi'kan 
miskwi  pang!.  Mlsa  wlgwas  ajipapagunang.  Midac  ima 
ka'iji'a^tod  wlgwasing  lisi/u  miskwi  ka'ijikackackwamagi- 
nang,  misa/  ka'ijina'i'nang.  Anlc  pltcmag  ugiwabandan. 
Ningudingigu  apackwamaginang  uglwabaman  abinodciyan, 
mlgu  48i/u  klkanonigut,  o*o*dac  ogri'gon :  "No'komis," 
ogri'gon  a'pi  kanonigut.  Anlc  mlsa  cigwa  ugrrgon : 
"Giki'kanimna  ayawiyan?  Nlnisa  Nanabucu. 


2.  THE  THP:FT  OF  FIRE. 

15        Anlc  mlsa  iu  cigwa  klni'tawigra't  4a8a/u  mindimoya. 

Mlsa    iu    caylgwa    ugri*nan    ini/u    o^umisan :    "  Kawmina 
ningutci  anicinabag  kiki'kanimaslg  tci'a*yawat?" 

"Aye8,"  ugri'gon  Ini  o'kumisan.      "O'O'widi7  agamiki'tci- 
gami  ayawag  Igi/u  anicinabag. " 
20        "Kunaga'ka  udayaslnawatug  lisi/u  ickuda?" 

"Aye8,"    ugri'gon    Ini11    o'kumisan ;    "Kaga't    utaiyanawa 
Ii8i/u  ickuda." 

O'O'widac  ugri'nan  Ini/u  o'kumisan  :    "Ambasano,  ninga- 

nasi'kan  'i8i/u  ickuda,"  ugi'i'nan  Ini/u  o'kumisan.      Oo'widac 

25   ugri'gon  Ini/u  o'kumisan  :    "Kawln  kidakackitosm.      Kaga't 

1  It   is  said  that  four  was   the  number  of  them  that  thus  came  forth :  Nanabushu, 


7 

But  not  content  with  the  idea  were  they  who  wished 
to  be  the  eldest.  Therefore  then  they  said  that  now  from 
different  places  they  wished  to  go  out.  One  saw  where 
there  was  light.  "Now,  straight  by  this  very  way  do  I 
wish  to  go."  And  so  while  they  were  debating  among 
themselves  as  to  who  should  be  the  first  to  go  out,  then 
was  when  they  burst  open  their  mother.1 

After  a  while  at  a  certain  place  where  round  about  the 
old  woman  was  looking  she  found  a  clot  of  blood.  There 
upon  some  birch-bark  she  began  peeling  (from  a  tree). 
And  now,  after  she  had  put  the  blood  upon  the  bark,  she 
then  folded  the  bark  over  it,  and  laid  it  away.  Naturally, 
by  and  by  she  looked  at  it.  Now,  once  when  she  opened 
the  bark  she  beheld  a  babe,  whereupon  she  was  addressed, 
and  this  is  what  she  was  told:  "O  my  grandmother!"  she 
was  told  at  the  time  that  she  was  addressed.  So  now 
this  was  what  she  was  told:  "Do  you  know  who  I  am? 
Why,  I  am  Nanabushu." 

2.  THE  THEFT  OF  FIRE. 

So  accordingly  then  did  the  old  woman  bring  him   up. 

And  so  by  and  by  he  said  to  his  grandmother:  "Don't 
you  know  of  a  place  where  there  are  some  people." 

"Yes,"  he  was  told  by  his  grandmother.  "In  yonder 
direction  on  the  farther  shore  of  the  sea  are  some  people." 

"I   am  curious  to  know  if  they  do  not  possess  fire." 

"Yes,"  he  was  told  by  his  grandmother;  "truly,  they 
do  possess  some  fire." 

Now,  this  was  what  he  said  to  his  grandmother :  "Please 
let  me  go  fetch  the  fire,"  he  said  to  his  grandmother. 
And  this  was  what  he  was  told  by  his  grandmother: 

the  deer,  the  chickadee,  and  the  Sun.     It  is  said  that  the  deer  was  one  of  the  very 
first  animals  to  be  created. 


8 

a'pidci  oganawandanawa  rrwisa  andawat.  Alkiwanzl  rrma 
aya.  Mlgu  a'pana  tasing  kljigatinig  asabin  ujra't.  Kawin 
wf  ka  ningutci'i'jasi,  mlgu  a'pana  ima  pmdik  ayat.  Nlnji- 
wasidac  lisi/u  otanisae,  miya'ta  iu  mojag  agwatcing  ayanit." 


5        O'O'widac   ugri'nan  !ni/u  o'kumisan  :    "Ma^u  ninga'ija," 
ogri'nan  ini/u  o'kumisan. 

"Awawa,"  ugri'gon  !ni/u  o'kumisan. 

Amc  misa  a'pl  cigwa  ka'i^kidut:   "Ambasano  tagackatin 
^o^     ki'tcigami,     wlgwasabakwang    tawlaprtadin    0*0'    ki- 
10  'tcigami." 

Misa  gagat  ka'ijiwabatinig  iwisa  ka-i>ckidut. 

"Ocrwidac  ninga'ijinagus,"  ki'i^kido;    "Nindawa  ninga- 

wabosonsiu."     Amc  misa  kaga't  ka'ijinagusit.      Misa  cigwa 

klmadciyataga'kwat.     Misa  kaga't  kawln  krtwajinsl.     Anic 

15   misa    ugiki'kaniman    'i'i'ma  ayanit  48i/u  anicinaba8.      Midac 

ima  ka'ijitagwicing  i'i'ma  wanda'i'blnit,   crcrwidac  kri'nan- 

dam :     "Ambagicsa     pinibinatit     a'a'wi'kwa,"    kri'nandam. 

O'O'widac  ki'i'jitciga  iima  wa'u'gwabaiminit  Ii9i/u  nibi,  midac 

ka/i'ji'a*gwawaba'irgut  Ii8i/u  ki'tcigami  mri'man  klti'tipa'u'gut 

20  mrrma     mi     'kwawan     ka'u'ndcigwaba'i-bmit.       O'O'widac 

kli'kido :     "Ambasano     ningawawiyatanimik."       Anic    misa 

a'kawabamat  tcibinasiblnit.      Kunlgimn,  kaga't  uglwabaman 

pldasamusanit. 


Midac   cigwa  iman  tagwicinbn   imasa  ayat,   cayigwa  ugl- 
25  gwaba*a*mini. 

Ka'ijimrkawabamigut    misa  ka'pri'zitapipinigut.      Midac 
4isi/u    ka'i'jisfkoplginigut    ka'i'jiklwawinigut    o'O'widi    ka'i'ji- 


"Not  will  you  be  able  to  succeed.  Truly,  a  very  careful 
watch  do  they  keep  over  it  there  where  they  dwell.  An 
old  man  at  the  place  abides.  And  all  the  while,  as  often 
as  the  day  comes  round,  upon  a  net  he  works.  Never 
anywhere  does  he  go,  but  always  there  indoors  he  remains. 
Now,  two  are  those  daughters  of  his,  and  only  they  are 
continually  out  of  doors." 

And  this  he  said  to  his  grandmother:  "Nevertheless  I 
will  go,"  he  said  to  his  grandmother. 

"Very  well,"   he  was  told  by  his  grandmother. 

Now,  this  was  what  he  then  said  afterwards :  "  I  will 
that  the  sea  shall  freeze,  as  thick  as  the  birch-bark 
covering  of  the  lodge  so  let  this  sea  freeze." 

It  was  true  that  it  happened  according  as  he  had  said. 

"Now,  this  is  the  way  I  shall  look,"  he  said.  "I  will 
that  I  become  a  hare."  So  accordingly  that  truly  was  the 
way  he  looked.  Thereupon  he  then  started  on  his  way 
over  the  ice.  It  was  true  that  he  did  not  break  through 
(the  ice).  Of  course  it  was  so  that  he  knew  that  at 
yonder  place  the  people  were  abiding.  And  so  after  he 
was  come  at  the  place  where  they  drew  water,  this  then 
he  thought:  "I  wish  that  for  water  some  woman  would 
come,"  he  thought.  And  this  he  did  there  where  she 
intended  to  dip  up  water:  that  after  he  was  washed  up 
by  the  waves  of  the  sea,  then  he  was  tossed  rolling  to 
the  place  from  which  the  woman  was  to  draw  water. 
And  this  he  said:  "I  wish  that  she  would  take  me  for  a 
plaything."  So  thereupon  he  lay  in  wait  for  her  to  come 
for  water.  Lo,  truly  he  beheld  her  walking  hitherward. 

Thereupon  soon  was  she  come  at  the  place  where  he 
was,  at  once  she  dipped  out  the  water. 

As  soon  as  he  was  discovered,  forthwith  was  he  seized 
upon.  And  after  the  water  had  been  rubbed  from  him, 
then  was  he  taken  over  there  to  her  home ;  in  the  bosom 


10 

plndomowint l    iu    wlya/u.      Mlsa',   ka'rjipindiganigut  kaga/t 
oglwabaman  a'kiwa^ziyan  namadabinit.   Kagact  asabi'kawan. 

Ocvwidac    ogrrnan   Vawi'kwa  ini/u  omisayan:    "Nackii- 

ginm,"  ugrrnan  klmodc  ini/u  omisayan.    "Nackaginm  wa!:-a*u 

5   kami'kawag,     wabozons.       Arnba'a'tata ;     wawiya     tatagusi 

wa8au  wabozons!    Ambasano  kaya  gin  wawiyatanim  nimisa11 

wa*a'wisa  wabozons." 

Oo'widac    ugri-gon    ini/u    umisayan :    "Klga'a'yawigunan 
kosinan    klga'U'nsumigunan,"    ugri'gon    Inomisayan ;    kimo- 
10  dcidac  ugri'gon  Ini/u  omisayan. 

Mldac  lici/u  ka'ijinandobagwid  ka-ijipagitinigut  rrma 
tclgickuda  wl'pangwawasagut.  Mldac  ^-i'-v  pa'piwad  Igi/u 
i'kwawag  wawlyadanimawat  Ini/u  wabozonsan. 

Ajiki'kanimiguwat  mi/u  osiwan.    "Kitomblgisim,"  ugri'gu- 
15   wan  lni/u  osiwan. 

'O^widac  ogi'i-nawan  Ini/u  osiwan:  "Nackaginin,"  ogl- 
inawan.  "Nackakinln  wasa11  wabozons." 

"Ca!"  ugliguwan  Ini/u  osiwan.      "Kawlnina  kigmontanzlm 
Igi/u    manitog    48i/u    ginlgiwad?    kanaml  a11  paejik  awizltug. 
20  Awra-sik,"    ugri'guwan    !ni/u   osiwan.      "Kagatsa  klgaglba- 
tisim  lieixwisa  kro'ta'pinag." 

O'O'widac  krr'kito  awi'kwa :  "Atatakuca  nlwawiyatanima 
'a^aVisa  wabosons."      O'o'widac  ogl'i'nan  Ini/u  osan  :  "Anm 
kagl'i'jinagwa'k 2    'i^wisa    kawabosonsiwit    Ca8a/u    manito?" 
25   ogri-nan  Ini/u  osan. 

O8owidac  kri-'kido :  "Kagatsa  kawin  kini'tanondazl. 
Kawlnina  kiwabamisl  a'pitcinagusiyan  ?" 

1  Ka-i-jipindomowint  iu  \vlya/u,  "in  the  bosom  of  her  garment  she  put  the 
creature;"  literally,  "in  the  bosom  of  her  garment  was  put  its  body." 


1 1 

of  her  garment  she  put  the  creature.1  And  after  he  had 
been  carried  inside,  truly  he  saw  an  old  man  that  was 
seated  (there).  Sure  enough,  he  was  at  work  making  a  net. 

And  this  said  the  woman  to  her  elder  sister :  "  I  say," 
said  she  in  secret  to  her  elder  sister,  "see  this  creature 
that  I  have  found,  a  little  bunny !  Oh;  such  a  cunning 
thing  is  this  dear  little  bunny!  I  wish  you  would  also 
think  it  cunning,  elder  sister,  this  little  bunny." 

Now,  this  was  she  told  by  her  elder  sister :  "  We  shall 
be  scolded  by  our  father,  on  account  of  it  shall  we  be 
taken  to  task,"  she  was  told  by  her  elder  sister;  and  in 
secret  she  was  told  by  her  elder  sister. 

Accordingly,  after  she  had  searched  in  the  bosom  of 
her  garment,  then  was  he  placed  there  beside  the  fire,  that 
from  the  heat  his  hair  might  become  dry.  Thereupon 
laughed  the  women  as  they  made  a  pet  of  the  little  bunny. 

Then  they  were  found  out  by  their  father.  "You  are 
noisy,"  they  were  told  by  their  father. 

And  this  they  said  to  their  father:  "See  this,"  they 
said  to  him,  "see  this  little  bunny!" 

"Beware!"  they  were  told  by  their  father.  "Have  you 
not  heard  of  the  manitous  how  they  were  born  ?  Perhaps 
this  might  be  one  of  them.  Go  put  it  where  you  got  it," 
they  were  told  by  their  father.  "Truly,  indeed,  were  you 
foolish  to  take  it." 

And  this  said  the  woman:  "Such  a  precious  pet  do  I 
think  this  little  bunny!"  And  this  she  said  to  her  father: 
"How  is  it  possible  for3  a  manitou  to  be  a  little  bunny?" 
she  said  to  her  father. 

And  this  he  said:  "Truly,  indeed,  you  are  not  heedful 
of  what  is  told  you.  Do  you  not  behold  me,  how  far  in 
years  I  am?" 

2  Anln  kagi'i-jinagwa'k,  uhow  is  it  possible  for  .  .  . ;''  more  literally,  "how  would 
it  look  or  seem  for  . . 


12 

O'owidac  klicitciga  'aV11  i'kwa,  nawandicigu  ogra'biswan 
Ini/u  wabozonsan ;  4isi'wisa  wl'pangwawaswat  kaTJikwa'kwa- 
kicimat  ima  tclgickuta. 

Ocrwidac    krrnandam    laca/u    Nanabucu :    "Mlmawlnrr11 
5   cigwa  pangwawasowanan." 

Amc  opa'pra'wan  Igi/u  i'kwawag. 

O'O'widac  kl'i'nandam :  "  Ambasano  ningapa'kinas." 
Kaegalt  ajipa'kinazut.  Ka/ijinawatisut  kaijisagitcikwas- 
kwanit. 

10        0'0'widac    krr'kitowag    Igi/u    i'kwawag.       "Nackaginln, 
osagitcipatwatan   lici/u  ickuta!"   utinawan  Ini/u  osiwan. 

"AT!"  kri-'kito  'aV11  alkiwanzl;  "kaga'tsa  kawln  kini- 
'tanonta^im  kago  anu'i'guyagin.  Kana  mlyasau  ('a'a*u) 
paejik  manito  l  pama'kaminank  iu  kitickutaminan."  Ka'i'- 
15  jipasiguntcisat  'aca/u  alkiwanzl  anugl  mawinatang  Ii5:i/u 
utciman.  Anugri-jimatablwapinang,  midac  ka-ijimi'kwaml- 
'kanig.  Midac  anicagu  ka'i'ciganawabamawat  micawiki- 
'tcigami  ani'O'cawackwa'kunanit,  midac  pmic  ka/ijipickwa- 
pamawat.  Anlc  klgwinawiijitcigawag. 


20  Midac  cigwa  otababandan  andawat 2  wuu'o*widac  ogri'- 
nan  Ini/u  o'kumisan  tcibwamadcat :  "Acwm,  magica  kaegact 
pltoyan  lici/u  ickuta,"  ogri'nan  Ini/u  o'kumisan.  Ka/rjika- 
nonat  a'pltababandank  lisi/u  andawat,  oc'5'  ogi'i'nan  a'pi 
pandigasat  Ini/u  o'kumisan  :  "A'tawapicin  nintcagis,  no'ko  !" 


25        Midac  kaega't  ka'iji'a-'tawapinat  'aca/u  mindimoya. 


1  Miya£au    paejik    manito,    "it    is    one    of   the    manitous;"  more  literally,   "it  is 
certain  manitou." 


13 

Now,  this  the  woman  did :  in  spite  of  what  she  was 
told,  she  exposed  the  little  bunny  to  the  heat  of  the  fire ; 
that  she  might  dry  its  hair,  she  turned  it  over  with  its 
other  side  near  the  fire. 

And  this  thought  Nanabushu  :  "By  this  time  surely  must 
I  be  dry  from  the  heat." 

Yet  at  him  laughed  the  women. 

And  this  he  thought:  "I  wish  a  spark  would  fall  upon 
me."  Sure  enough,  a  spark  fell  upon  him.  After  he  was 
set  on  fire,  then  out  of  doors  he  leaped. 

And  this  said  the  women:  "Look  at  him,  out  of  doors 
is  he  running  with  the  fire !"  they  said  to  their  father. 

"Too  bad!"  said  the  old  man.  "Truly,  indeed,  are  you 
unheedful  of  what  is  told  you.  Doubtless  it  is  one  of  the 
manitous  l  that  has  come  to  take  away  this  fire  of  ours." 
Then,  leaping  to  his  feet,  the  old  man  ran  to  his  canoe  •, 
but  it  was  of  no  avail.  He  flung  his  canoe  into  the 
water ;  but  it  was  of  no  use,  for  it  was  frozen  with  ice.  And 
all  they  could  do  was  to  watch  (the  hare)  far  out  on  the 
great  expanse  burning  with  a  blue  flame,  (watching  him) 
till  they  beheld  him  pass  out  of  sight.  Of  course  they 
were  helpless  to  do  anything. 

And  then  presently  he  was  coming  in  sight  of  his 
home.3  Now,  this  he  had  said  to  his  grandmother  before 
he  started  away :  "  Be  prepared  if  perchance  I  truly  happen 
to  fetch  the  fire,"  he  (thus)  had  said  to  his  grandmother. 
Afterwards  he  addressed  her  when  he  was  coming  in  sight 
of  their  home,  and  this  he  said  to  his  grandmother  when 
he  came  flying  in :  "  Rub  the  fire  off  from  me,  I  am 
burning  up,  my  grandmother !" 

Whereupon  truly  off  from  him  did  the  old  woman  rub 
the  fire. 

*  Andawut,   "his  home;"   literally,  "where  they   dwell." 


14 
Mldac  48i/u  ima  kauntinamowat  Ci8i/u  ickuta. 

Oo'widac    krr'kito   'a8a/u  Nanabucu:    "Mlsa  iu  ka'ijina- 
gusit  'a8a/u  wabos   48i/u  tcinlbink."  l 

3.  NANABUSHU  SLAYS  HIS  YOUNGER  BROTHER. 

Anlc     mlsai     iu     cigwa    kro'tickutamiwat.       Anlc    misai 

5   ka'ijiwawltigamat  Ini/u  o'kumisan  win  kawi'ka  pizan  kra1- 

yasinon    wu86    ki'tcigami.      Wabos    namatapit    ijini'katatug 

wo8o  ki'tcigami.      Mldac  a'pana  mojag   48iwidi  klaVinama- 

tapit.      Oo'widac    ogi'i'nan    Ini/u    o'kumisan :    "Ambasano, 

no'ko,   ml-f*11  mini'k  kawabonsoyan."      Mldac  kis>rwidi  ki'tci- 

10  yanayabi'kagwan,    mldac    i'i'widi    ugitapi'k  pana  kl'u-nabit. 

Mldac  ka-i-cinagwa'k  48i/u  asin.     Mldac  ka'i-'kitut :  "Wabos 

namadabit  uga'i'cini'katanawa  oguu  anicinabag." 


Anlc  misa  iu  clgwa  kra-nicinapawit.  Kawm  kayab1 
kra'binotci'rwisl.  Wircr  ugri'nan  lni/u  o^kumisan  :  "Kigi- 
1  5  'kanimina  ayawiyan  ?" 

"Kawm,"  ogri'gon  mi/u  o'kumisan. 

"Ninisa  Nanabucu  nintau."  O^o  oglinan  Ini/u  o'kumisan  : 
"Kuniga  mlgu'i^11  ajipajiguwanan  !"  ogrrnari  Ini/u  o^kurnisan. 


"Aye8,"   ogri'gon  ;    "mlgu'i*11  ajipajiguyan,"  ogri'gon  Ini/u 
20  o'kumisan. 

O^o-widec    ogri'nan  :    "Ambasano  manu  wlndamawicin," 
ogrrnan  ini/u  o'kumisan.      "Kuniga  ningi'O'O'simitug  !" 

"Aye8,"     ogri'gon  ;     "kawln    kmagusisl    awagwan    Ia8a/u 
ka'a'O'siyan,"  ogl'i'gon  Ini/u  o'kumisan.     O8owidac  ogi'i'gon 

1  That  is,  as  if  he  had  been  scorched  by  fire. 


'5 

Therefore  such  was  how  they  there  came  into  posses 
sion  of  fire. 

And  this  said  Nanabushu  :  "Therefore  such  shall  be 
the  look  of  the  hare  in  the  summer-time."  l 

3.   NANABUSHU  SLAYS  HIS  YOUNGER  BROTHER. 

Now,  therefore,  were  they  then  in  possession  of  fire. 
So  now  afterwards,  while  he  lived  with  his  grandmother, 
never  still  was  this  sea.  Seated-Hare  was  perhaps  the 
name  of  this  sea,  for  it  was  always  his  custom  to  go 
frequently  over  there  and  sit.  And  this  he  said  to  his 
grandmother :  "  Now,  my  grandmother,  it  is  now  long 
enough  that  I  have  been  a  hare."  And  so  at  that  place 
there  must  have  been  a  promontory  jutting  (out  into  the 
sea),  and  over  there  on  the  top  was  where  he  always  sat. 
And  now  such  was  the  way  that  rock  looked.  And  this 
was  what  he  said:  "Seated-Hare  shall  these  people  call  it." 

So  thereupon  he  now  became  a  human  being.  No 
longer  was  he  a  child.  This  he  said  to  his  grandmother : 
"Do  you  know  who  I  am?" 

"No,"  he  was  told  by  his  grandmother. 

"I  am  indeed  Nanabushu."  This  he  said  to  his  grand 
mother.  "I  wonder  if  indeed  I  am  an  only  (child)!"  he 
said  to  his  grandmother. 

"Yes,"  he  was  told.  "Truly  are  you  but  an  only 
(child),"  he  was  told  by  his  grandmother. 

And  this  he  said  to  her:  "I  wish  that  you  would  please 
tell  me,"  he  said  to  his  grandmother.  "I  wonder  if  I  may 
have  had  a  father!" 

"Yes,"  he  was  told.  "They  could  not  see  whoever  he 
was  that  was  your  father,"  he  was  told  by  his  grand 
mother.  And  this  he  was  told  by  his  grandmother:  "Dead 


i6 

Ini/u     o'kumisan  :      "Kinibu     'af:au     ogiyamban  :    misagui'r11 
ajiwlndamonan.      Kawin  kitagatarnosinon." 

O^'O'widac  ogri'nan  'a8a/u  Nanabucu :  "Anln  kakicina- 
gwa'k  kapaciguyan  ?  kagatamawiyan,"  ogri'nan  Ini/u  cVku- 
5  misan.  Mldac  caylgwa  kri-'kitut:  "Anln  wandci-i-citcigii- 
yan  'i^i711  katamawiyan  48iwisa  ka'ijiwabisiyang?  Kawin 
po'tc  niwanandazin  i'i'wisa  ka'ijiwabisiyang.  Ayawagisa 
nintinandam  nintcikiwayang.  Mano  taga  wlndamawicin 
i'i'wisa  ka'i'jiwabisiyang." 


10  Mldac  klsagimigut  'aV11  mindimoya.  O'o'widic  ogri'nan 
mi/u  ocicanyan  :  "Anlc,  kigawindamon,  kaegalt  kawin  kigl- 
pajikuzi  i'i'wisa  klmgiyag.  Ka^ga't  kanangwanawm  :  wu*o' 
kigl'i'jiwapisim,  kigmisawa  la'a'u  kigiwa  lisiu  a'pi  naguyag. 
Kaegalt  anica  kami'kwandaman  lisi/u  wa'ijitcigayan  'iYwisa 

15   dac  ka'u'ndciniktawigi'i*nan." 


O'o'widac  ogri'nan  Ini/u  o'kumisan :  "On,  minangwana 
lij:i/u  ka'i  jiwabisiyan  Ci8i/u  kamgiyan !  Anic,  kawin  nm  nin- 
gmisasi  casa/u  ninga."  Mldac  i'i'ma  kl'i'nandank.  "Intawa 
ningatawiwabamag,"  ki'i'nandam ;  "Igi/u  nitcikiwanyag." 
20  Na,  midac  a'p!  kri'nat  lni/u  o'kumisan.  "Tndawa  ninga- 
tawiwabama  laca/u  ka'klwaci'i't." 


"Kagu7!"    utanugri'gon    lni/u  o'kumisan.      "Anln  ka'u-n- 
dci-i'cictcigayan     'iY11    laca/u    kltcikiwanzi    i'i'wisa    ka*u'ndci- 
nantopanltawatupan  ?" 
25        "Kawin,"    ogri*nan-,    "potc    nlwrijictciga."      Mldac    a'pi 


1  Kangact  kanangwanavvin,  "as  true  as  I  speak,"  is  a  free  rendering  of  an  adverbial 
expression,  "perhaps,"  but  given  in  some  such  phrase  as  "truly,  did  the  event  or 
thing  happen." 


'7 

is    she    who    was    your  mother :  that  is  all  I   can  tell  you. 
Not  would  I  hide  it  from  you." 

And  this  to  her  said  Nanabushu  :  "How  could  it  pos 
sibly  be  that  I  should  be  the  only  (child)?  You  must  be 
hiding  it  from  me,"  he  said  to  his  grandmother.  And 
this  now  he  said :  "  Why  do  you  behave  in  such  a  way 
that  you  should  keep  from  me  that  which  has  happened 
to  us?  In  spite  of  all  that,  not  am  I  ignorant  of  what 
has  happened  to  us.  In  existence  somewhere  I  am  sure 
are  my  brothers.  Please  do  convey  to  me  the  knowledge 
of  what  happened  to  us." 

Thereupon  frightened  became  the  old  woman.  So  this 
she  said  to  her  grandson:  "Well,  I  will  tell  you  about  it 
Of  a  truth  were  you  not  alone  at  the  time  when  you 
(and  they)  were  born.  As  true  as  I  speak,1  this  was  what 
happened  to  you  (and  them) :  you  (and  they)  killed  your 
mother  at  the  time  when  you  (and  they)  were  born. 
Verily,  had  I  not  carried  out  the  purpose  3  of  my  mind, 
I  could  never  have  reared  you." 

And  this  he  said  to  his  grandmother:  "Oh,  so  that 
was  the  sort  of  thing  that  happened  to  me  when  I  was 
born !  Why,  it  was  not  I  who  killed  my  mother."  Where 
upon  he  there  made  up  his  mind  (what  to  do).  "There 
fore  will  I  go  to  see  them,"  he  thought,  "those  brothers 
of  mine."  Accordingly,  then  was  the  time  he  said  to  his 
grandmother:  "Therefore  will  I  go  to  see  him  who  made 
me  an  orphan." 

"Don't!"  in  vain  was  he  told  by  his  grandmother. 
"What  is  the  reason  of  your  undertaking  that  you  should 
go  and  seek  for  him  ?" 

"Nay,"  he  said  to  her,    "rather  am  I  determined  to  do 

2  That  is,  of  making  him  an  instrument  whereby  a  new  order  of  things  should 
come  to  pass  in  the  world.  It  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  old  woman  is 


mother  earth. 

2. — PUBL.    AMER.    ETHN.    SOC.    VOL.    VII. 


i8 

kimadci'tat  lisi/u  ubi'kwa'kon  krirji'tot.  Mldac  ka*i*jikijiltat, 
mldac  a' pi  cigwa  klmadcat ;  mldac  owidi  kwaya'k  cawa- 
nung  ka'i'jimadcat.  Anlc  oglki'kaniman  iwidi  ayanit  Ini/u 
wltcikiwanyan.  A'pi'i'dac  rrwidi  pajwandank  iwidi  andanit 
5  mwingidac  ugi'a'santcigtinan  Ini/u  ublkwa'kon.  Mldac  a' pi 
i*i*widi  ka*i*ji'o*tisat,  mldac  ka'i'jiplndigawat.  'OVwidac 
ogri'gon  Nanabucu  :  "Mlsa  48i/u  pinandopan^tawiyan  ?" 


"Aye8,"  ogri'nan. 

"Anlc  mlsa  cigwa  tcimadci'kutatiyang." 

10  Anlc  mlsa  cigwa  klmadcrkutatiwat,  mlsa  cigwa  klpimut- 
iwat.  Aji'a'janici'kawint  lasa/u  Nanabucu  ka'i'ji'irdi'tank 
lni/u  ubi'kwa'kon,  i'i'ma  klpi'a'santcigut.  Mri'ma  rninawa 
ka'u'ndci'a'janici'kawat,  mldac  plnic  andanit  ka/rjipagami- 
niskawat.  Mldac  ima  mlnawa  ka-u-ndcra'janici'kagut, 

1 5  mldac  mlnawa  ri'widi  klpra'santcigut  lni/u  upikwa'kon 
ka'i'jipagaminickagut.  Mlsa  minawa  anugri'jiacanici'kawat, 
pacutac  ogriji'a-canicikawan.  Mldac  minawa  ri  ma  ka- 
•u-ndci'a'janici'kagut,  mlnawa  ogluti'tanan  lni/u  upikwa'kon. 
Mldac  i'i'ma  krrnandank :  "Mlmawin  liei/u  tcimamacri'pfo- 

•  •  o 

20  yan."  Kaegalt  a'pitci  pangl  udayanan  lni/u  upikwa'kon ; 
mldac  a'pitci  angaslnnatinik.  Mldac  cigwa  klmawit,  o'o'wi- 
dac  kri'nandam  :  "Mlmawin  'isi/u  tcinisiguyan,"  kri'nandam. 


Midac  ka'pi'i'jikanonigut  lni/u  cingusan  :   "Anin  andiyan? 
kwandigukuca  kima/u,   Nanabucu,"  ugrrgon  lni/u  cingusan. 


19 

it."  So  thereupon  he  then  set  to  work  making  some 
arrows.  And  when  he  was  prepared,  he  then  set  out;  it 
was  off  in  this  direction,  straight  toward  the  south,  where 
he  started  for.  Of  course  he  knew  that  at  the  place  was 
abiding  that  brother  of  his.  So  when  he  felt  that  he  was 
nearing  yonder  place  where  they  lived,  then  in  four  different 
places  he  hid  his  arrows.  And  when  over  there  he  had 
arrived,  he  then  went  into  (the  place)  where  the  other 
was.  And  this  was  what  Nanabushu  was  told:  "And  so 
you  have  come  looking  for  me?" 

"Yes,"  he  said  to   him. 

"Then  we  might  as  well  now  begin  fighting  with  each 
other." 

So  thereupon  started  they  to  fight  with  each  other, 
and  then  soon  were  they  shooting  at  each  other.  While 
Nanabushu  was  being  forced  back,  he  came  to  where  his 
arrows  were,  there  where  he  had  concealed  them.  Then 
in  turn  back  from  this  place  he  drove  the  other,  even 
all  the  way  to  the  place  where  the  other  lived  he  drove 
him.  Thereupon  back  from  that  place  in  turn  was  he 
chased  by  the  other,  and  again  back  to  where  he  had 
concealed  his  arrows  when  on  his  way  hither  was  he 
driven.  Then  again  he  tried  in  vain  to  drive  him  back, 
but  only  a  little  distance  he  made  him  retrace  his  way. 
Whereupon  in  turn  from  that  place  was  he  driven  back, 
once  more  he  came  to  the  place  of  his  arrows.  And  so 
there  he  thought :  "It  is  possible  that  I  may  be  vanquished." 
Truly,  very  few  were  the  arrows  he  had ;  for  now  very 
few  they  were.  Whereupon  he  now  began  weeping,  for 
this  he  thought:  "It  is  like  enough  that  I  shall  be  killed," 
(thus)  he  thought. 

Thereupon  came  a  Weasel,  by  whom  he  was  addressed, 
saying:  "What  is  the  matter  with  you?  It  seems  as  if 
you  have  been  crying,  Nanabushu,"  he  was  told  by  the 


2O 

"Kawin    nino-utano    kigatisl.      Nacka    kigawmdamon    kadu- 

o  o  •  •  o 

cictcigayan,"  ugri'gon  Ini/u  cingusan.  "Nackaguta  rrma 
ina-a/n,"  ugligon  mi/u  cingusan ;  "pimutamawi  iu  osagi- 
panwan." 

5  Midac  a'pl  kisasa'kwat  lasa/u  Nanabucu.  Ningutingigu 
madcinicikawat  Ini/u  wltcikiwanyan.  Midac  ka'i'jipimutama- 
wat  wifii/u  osagipanwanini.  Midac  acitcinkitcisanit.  Acima- 
winanat  laca/u  Nanabucu,  o'6'widac  ugl'i-nan  :  "Manu  nibun!" 

O'O'widac  ogri'gon  !ni/u  wltcikiwanyan  :    "Kagatsa  kitini- 
10  ga'a*    'asa/u  l    pitcinag    'aVu  kanipimadisit."     Midac  ka'iji- 
mawinit,    ml    Ii9i/u  kamawimat  anicinabac.      Kawin   anugri*- 
nandanz!  'i^Visa  tcinisint. 

A'pitcidac  kri*nandam  waca/u  Nanabucu  wlnisat.      Midac 
ka/ijikacki'tot  kinisat  Ini/u  ucPmayan. 
15        Midac  atcina  klclpayantamon. 

"Mackut  klgamganis  o8fo'witi  ka'i'jawat  ogo/u  kanipima- 
tisisiguk  •  mi'i'witi  tci'a*yayan,  mri'witi  tcinlganisiyan." 

Anic  midac  kaegalt  ka'i'jina'kwa'tawat  mldac  ka'i'ji'i'nat : 
"Mamindaga    kidiniga'a1    ;aca/u    anicinaba    pitcinag    wanipi- 
20  matisit." 

"Ayec,  osamisa  tanonta  mockina  o^o/u  alki.  Anlndidac 
tci-a'ya'pan  'aVwisa  anicinaba  *aca/u  pitcinag  kani'o*ntatisit? 
Midac  intawa  lisi/u  ka'irntci'i'jiwabisit  lasa/u  anicinaba  4Ri/u 
tcinibut.  Nar,  lisi/u  wandcri'citcigayan  i'i^wisa  tcinibut 
25  'aca/u  pitcinag  ka'a-nimockinat  o'O'man  a'kmg,  o'o'  ka'irji- 
toyan  o  a'ki.  Anawi  kitakri'jitcigamin  'isi/u  panima  kawl- 
gi'kat  tciglnibo'pan,  kawlndac  ningutci  ta*a*yasl  wo^'o'' 

1  Kitiniga-a-  'aeau,  "you  are  doing  wrong  to  them."  .  .  .  The  object  of  the  verb 
is  singular,  but  the  sense  is  plural.  The  Ojibwa  is  fond  of  this  construction,  and 
it  is  of  frequent  occurrence  in  the  texts. 


21 


Weasel.  "Nothing  (harmful)  is  going  to  happen  to  you. 
Listen !  (and)  I  will  advise  you  what  you  are  to  do,"  he 
was  told  by  the  Weasel.  "Now,  right  at  yonder  place  do 
you  shoot,"  he  was  told  by  the  Weasel.  "Shoot  at  the 
wrap  (of  his  hair-knot)." 

Thereupon  was  the  time  that  Nanabushu  whooped. 
Once  as  he  began  driving  his  brother  back,  he  then  shot 
at  the  wrap  (of  his  hair-knot).  Thereupon  the  other  fell 
forward.  Then  to  him  ran  Nanabushu,  and  this  he  said 
to  him:  "Please  die!" 

And  this  he  was  told  by  his  brother:  "Verily,  you  are 
doing  wrong  to  them  :  who  in  the  future  are  to  live." 
Thereupon  he  wept,  as  it  was  for  these  people  he  wept. 
Not  was  he  willing  that  he  should  be  killed. 

But  thoroughly  determined  was  Nanabushu  to  kill  him. 
Whereupon  he  then  succeeded  in  killing  his  younger  brother. 

And  so  for  a  little  while  was  the  other  out  of  his  wits. 

"Instead  you  shall  be  leader  over  there  where  will  go 
these  who  are  to  die  ;  in  that  place  shall  you  remain,  in 
that  place  shall  you  be  foremost." 

So  then  truly,  after  he  gave  him  answer  (and  consented), 
this  was  what  he  said  to  him  :  "  Particular  harm  have  you 
brought  upon  the  people  who  in  time  to  come  are  to  live." 

"Yea,  overmuch  (and)  too  soon  will  this  earth  fill  up. 
Where  will  live  the  people  who  in  after  time  are  to  be 
born?  Now,  therefore,  this  is  what  shall  come  to  pass, 
that  people  are  to  die.  So,  therefore,  this  is  why  I  have 
brought  it  about  that  they  should  die  who  in  times  to 
come  will  fill  up  this  earth,  this  earth  which  I  have  created. 
Although  we  could  bring  it  to  pass  that  not  till  they  have 
reached  old  age  they  should  die,  yet  nowhere  would  they 
have  room  if  this  should  take  place.  Therefore  this  is 
how  it  shall  come  to  pass  that  while  they  are  yet  in 
infancy  they  shall  die.  Such,  therefore,  is  what  I  now 


22 


ijiwaba'k.  Na,  midac  ka/irndcri'jiwaba'k  Ii8i'u  magwa 
abinodcri-wit  Wu  tcinibut.  Na',  misa  iu  wayabantaman, 
midac  tibicko  ka/rjiwabisit  Ia8a/u  pitclnag  ka'a'ninibut 
tibickogu  ka'ijiwabisiyan.  Anicasa  tayanda'kl  owat1  paji'k 
5  alki.  Ayayan  tcinasi'kawi'k  ka'a-nri'ckwayat." 


4.   NANABUSHU  KILLS  ANOTHER  BROTHER. 

Na,  misa  ka/ijictcigat  Ia8a/u  Nanabucu.  Na,  midac 
cigwa  kra-ndawabamat  Ini/u  o^kumisan.  Midac  mlnawa 
kra'wltci'a-yawat.  Nigutlngigu  mlnawa  ka'i-ci'i-'kitut  48i/u 
winandunawat  lni/u  paji'k  wltcikiwayan,  '•oPo'dac  ugri'gon 

10  Ini/u  o'kumisan  :  "Kawm  kidanisasl,"  ugri'gon  Ini/u  o'kumi- 
san.  "Pa'tanlnowan  Ii8i/u  kanawanimigut.  Midac  ka'irn- 
dcikaskitosiwamban.  Nackaguta  klgawmdamon  ka-i'cina- 
mambaban  misawa  icayan,  Amc  minising  aya  lafia/u 
uka'kwan  'a8a/u  tcaglga'a'nk.  Nackadac,  o'O'ma11  nawiki- 

15  'tcigami  plgi/u  ta'kamakuntcin.  Kawm  kitakackitosm  tci- 
kapi'kawatipan  misawa  tclman  anu'a'yoyan ;  mlgo'i'ma11 
ka'kina  kajaku'kat  kitcimaning.  Na,  ml^i'11  abitink  kirrji- 
naman.  Mlnawa  paplmickaiyan  misawa  48iman  anigacki- 
•Q-yan,  mlnawa  kago  kigawabandan,  cingwa'k  klgai'nan- 

20  dam.  Midac  'asa/u  kistci'o'ga  omi  stciga  kawabamimat. 
Kawln  dac  po'tc  kitakackitosin  misawa  anawlwlmackawat. 
Na,  misa  i'i'man  abitink  48i/u  sanagusiwin  andaguk.  Misawa 
mlnawa  rrma  anikackioyan,  kumax  tacigu  a'pl  papimickai- 
yan  klgatababandan  i'i'ma  ayat.  Mldacigu  pacuwabanda- 

25   man,   klgawabamag  waswag  tciba'ta'rnowat.      Midac  kawm 


23 

see.  It  is  the  same  thing  that  will  happen  to  them  who 
in  the  future  are  to  live,  and  like  unto  what  is  now  hap 
pening  to  you.  It  is  only  a  change  of  going  from  one 
earth  to  another.  To  you  where  you  are  shall  come  they 

who  shall  cease  to  live  (here)." 

^^     - 
4.   NANABUSHU  KILLS  ANOTHER  BROTHER. 

Such,  therefore,  was  what  Nanabushu  did.  So  accord 
ingly  he  went  to  seek  his  grandmother.  Thereupon  again 
he  went  and  staid  with  her.  On  another  occasion  when 
he  said  that  he  intended  to  go  and  look  for  another  of 
his  brothers,  then  this  was  he  told  by  his  grandmother : 
"You  would  not  be  able  to  kill  him,"  he  was  told  by  his 
grandmother.  "Many  are  they  under  whose  watch  he  is 
kept.  That  is  the  reason  why  it  will  be  impossible  for 
you  to  succeed.  Give  ear,  and  I  will  declare  to  you  what 
you  are  likely  to  see  should  you  by  chance  happen  to  go. 
Now,  upon  an  island  abides  he  that  hews  upon  his  shin. 
And  listen !  Out  across  the  middle  of  this  sea  some  pitch 
extends,  floating  upon  the  water.  Not  will  you  succeed 
in  passing  (by  that  place),  even  though  you  should  try  to 
make  use  of  a  canoe ;  there  on  every  part  of  your  canoe 
will  (the  pitch)  stick.  So  that  is  one  of  the  things  which 
you  will  see.  Furthermore,  as  you  go  paddling  along, 
should  you  by  chance  succeed  in  passing  in  your  canoe, 
then  something  else  will  you  behold,  some  pines  you  will 
think  them  to  be.  That  is  the  Great  Pike  whose  big  fins 
upon  the  back  you  will  see.  Not  at  all  will  you  succeed 
if  you  wish  to  pass  around.  Therefore  that  is  one  of 
the  difficult  places  lying  in  (your  way).  Should  you  again 
succeed  in  passing  the  place  with  your  canoe,  and  then 
go  paddling  on  a  certain  distance,  you  will  come  in  sight 
of  the  place  where  he  is.  And  as  you  approach  the 
place,  you  will  see  some  swans  that  will  be  in  a  swarm. 


24 

kltakackitosm  mlnawa  anawi  wlmackawatwa.  Mri/>u  kana- 
wanimigut  'a8a/u  wanantunawat.  Wo'O'widac  klgatina 
wa8a/u  wa8wa  awagwan  ni'tam  kanontagusigwan  :  'Cii!' 
kigatina.  'Nacka  a11  mackwat  wabisfpin,'  kiga'i'na.  Mldac 
5  ka/rjinlminamawat  o'o'dac  ta'i''kito  wa8a/u  waswa :  ^Nima- 
lkamig  !ni/u  wabisipinln,'  lasa/u  waswa  ta'i-'kito.  Misawadac 
mlnawa  rrma  anikacki'o-yan  i'i'ma11  mlnawa  abiting  kayabi. 
Mldac  cigwa  tcigl'kabaiyan  i'i'ma  ayat.  Mldac  anigu'piyan 
tmdisiwan  nondagusinit.  Tabltciba'to,  o'o'dac  klgatcictcigit ; 
10  mi'tigumin  klganlminamawa.  Mldac  ka*i'4kitut:  lNima4kamig 
'i7!11  mi'tigumin  lasa/u  tindlsi  tai'kito.'  Midac  mlnawa  i'i'ma 
tclpitagwicing  'a^wisa  i'i'ma  ayat  minising."  O'O'widac 
ogi'i'gon  ini/u  o^kumisan :  "  Wantcita  nawiminis  ta  lasa/u 
nandawabamat.  Wa'kwagan  *isi/u  andat." 


15  Nax,  midac  a'pl  kamadci'tat  lisi/u  ki'uji'tot  ;i8i/u  utclman. 
A'pi'i'dac  ka'klcitot  mlnawa  ka'i'cinantawabamat  nlganigu 
waninunit  ini/u  awaslyan.  Ka'iji'u'ci'tot  'iYwisa  pimita 
mlgu  iu  ka'kina  ka/rcina'rnang  'i8i/u  waya'batci'tot.  Mlnawa 
ugi'a'ndawabaman  wabisipinln.  A 'pi  mlnawa  kamamat 

20  lni/u  wabislpinin.  Mlnawa  ogra'ndawabandanan  lni/u  mi'ti- 
guminan.  Anic  mli^  caylgwa  krkijftat.  Mldac  acpi  klma- 
dci'tat  lni/u  upi'twa'kon  kruji'tot.  Mldac  a'pl  kaklci'tot 
Ini/u  upi'twa'kon,  "Anlc  mlsa  cigwa  wlmadcayan,"  ogri'nan 
Ini/u  o'kumisan.  Wo'O'widac  ugi'i'nan  :  "Anlc  mlsa  wlnan- 

25  topaniyan,"  ogri'nan  lni/u  o'kumisan.  Oo'widac  kri-'kito  : 
"Nlyokun  ningatacicta  wo'o-  tcra/cawa'cryan  o'o'  ki'tcigami. 
Anlc  mlgu'i'11  mini'k  ka'a'nwa'ting  'i8^11  myokun,"  kri-'kito 
Ia8a/u  Nanabucu. 

Nar,     midac     cigwa     klmadcat,     kl'pozit     48i/u    utclman. 


25 

And  now  you  will  not  succeed  again,  even  though  it  be 
your  wish  to  pass  round  them.  So  in  the  keeping  of 
these  is  he  whom  you  wish  to  seek.  Now,  this  is  what 
you  will  say  to  the  Swan,  whichsoever  shall  be  the  first 
to  make  itself  heard:  'Hist!'  you  shall  say  to  it.  'Look, 
here  is  in  payment  a  white  potato,'  you  shall  say  to  it. 
Thereupon  as  you  offer  it  (the  potato),  this  is  what  the 
Swan  will  say :  'He  is  taking  from  me  the  white  potato,' 
the  Swan  will  say.  And  if  by  chance  again  through  that 
place  you  succeed  in  passing  with  your  canoe,  there  will 
still  remain  one  other  (difficulty),  and  it  will  be  where  you 
go  ashore  there  where  he  is.  And  when  you  go  up  from 
the  shore,  a  Bluejay  will  be  heard  calling.  He  will  come 
running  hitherward,  and  this  is  what  you  shall  do :  an 
acorn  shall  you  offer  to  it.  And  this  is  what  it  will  say : 
'He  is  taking  the  acorn  from  me/  the  Bluejay  will  say. 
So  then  next  to  the  place  will  come  he  who  abides  there 
on  the  island."  And  this  was  what  he  was  told  by  his 
grandmother:  "In  the  very  centre  of  the  island  dwells  the 
one  whom  you  seek.  At  one  end  of  it  is  his  home." 

So  thereupon  he  began  upon  the  work  of  making  his 
canoe.  After  he  had  finished  it,  he  then  sought  for  a 
game-being  that  was  unsurpassingly  fat.  After  he  had 
made  the  oil,  he  then  put  away  all  that  he  expected  to 
use.  Next  he  sought  for  a  white  potato.  After  he  had 
obtained  the  white  potato,  he  next  looked  for  the  acorns. 
So  therefore  was  he  now  fully  prepared.  And  then  was 
when  he  started  on  the  work  of  making  his  arrows.  Now, 
when  he  had  finished  making  his  arrows,  "Now,  therefore, 
I  want  to  be  off  (to  war),"  he  said  to  his  grandmother. 
And  this  was  what  he  said  to  her:  "Four  days  I  shall 
spend  crossing  this  sea,  for  the  length  of  time  that  it  will 
be  (calm  will  be)  four  days/'  (so)  said  Nanabushu. 

So    therefore    he    started    away,    he    was    in    his    canoe. 


26 

Ningutingigu  kaega't  papimickat  ri'wisa  kistcigami  cigwa 
gaga/t  oglwabandan  kago  ta'kamakundanik.  "Anlc," 
ogri'gon  lni/u  o'kumisan  *ofio/u ;  "kawln  potc  kitakackitosin 
tciwlmackaman"  ogri'gon  Ini/u  o'kumisan.  A4pri*dac  wadi- 
5  'tawat  Ini/u  pigiwan,  mldac  ka/rjiposinank  li€i/u  utciman 
kaya  48i/u  utabwi ;  mldac  ka'i'citca'kisat,  mlsa  kakanaga 
pangl  kra'gukaslwan  i'i'ma  utcimaning  kaya  utabwlng. 
Nax,  mldac  ka^ga't  wiwaylba  klposinank  ^Y  utciman  kaya 
W11  utabwi.  Mldac  ajikackitot  klgabi'kawat  Ini/u  pigiwan. 
10  Mldac  ka/i'jimadcru-t.  Ningutingigu  mlnawa  papimickat 
ml  cigwa  gaga't  ogiwabaman  cingwa'kwan  kri'nandam. 
Ajigwa  ubacwabandan,  kuninginln  mlwa/nini/u  ki'tci'o'gawan. 
Ocrwidac  ogri'nan  a'pi  wadi'tawat:  "Ambasano  kawa'kun 
Igi/u  kimistcigu't,"  ugri'nan  Ini/u  tcro'gawan. 


15  Mldac  kaegat  ka'i'jictciganit  ini/u  tci'6'gawan,  mldac 
ajikabi'kawat.  Mldac  a'pi  kltababandank  4ci/u  wa'ijat. 
Cigwa  obacwabandan,  cigwa  kaega't  owabaman  lni/u  wa!:wan. 
Cigwa  owabamigon  Ini/u  waVan,  cigwa  nondagusiwan. 
"Ic!"  ugri'nan.  Ka'i'cimminamawat  Ini/u  wabisipinin. 


20       Cixgwa  pitcipa'towan. 

"Ic,  anln  andiyan  ?"   obri'nani. 

"Ka,  nima^kamig  caca/u  waswa  ini/u  wabisipinin,"  ki'i'ckito 
awaswa.  O'5'widac  kri-'kito :  "Anln  win  kaya  win  mana- 
kacki'a't  Ini/u  wabisipinin?"  oglprrgon. 

25  Mldac  anicikiwanit  anlc  ki'kasu  'aV11  Nanabucu.  Mldac 
a'pl  mlnawa  kanicimadcat.  Ka'i'cikabat  mldac  ima11 
ka'kina  klnagatank  Ini/u  udabatcitciganan. 


27 

Now,  truly,  once  as  he  went  journeying  by  canoe  over 
that  sea,  he  now  indeed  beheld  something  lying  lengthwise 
upon  the  water  across  his  way.  "To  be  sure,"  he  had 
been  told  by  his  grandmother  about  this;  "in  no  way 
will  you  succeed  in  passing  round  it,"  he  had  been  told 
by  his  grandmother.  Now,  when  he  was  approaching  the 
pitch,  he  then  oiled  his  canoe  and  his  paddle ;  and  when 
he  drove  his  canoe  into  (the  pitch),  not  even  a  speck  (of 
the  pitch)  was  stuck  to  his  canoe  or  his  paddle.  So  it  was 
true  that  every  now  and  then  he  kept  oiling  his  canoe 
and  his  paddle.  So  thus  he  succeeded  in  passing  through 
the  pitch.  Thereupon  he  continued  his  way.  And  another 
time  as  he  was  journeying  along  in  his  canoe,  he  now 
truly  saw  some  pines,  he  thought.  Soon  he  got  a  near 
view,  and,  sure  enough,  it  was  the  Great  Pike.  And  this 
he  said  to  it  when  he  drew  up  to  it :  "  Please  lower  the 
fins  of  your  back,"  he  said  to  the  Great  Pike. 

And  then  truly,  after  the  Great  Pike  had  done  so,  he 
accordingly  passed  over  it.  And  then  was  when  he  came 
in  sight  of  the  place  whither  he  was  bound.  Presently 
he  got  a  close  view  of  it,  now  truly  he  saw  the  Swan. 
Soon  was  he  observed  by  the  Swan,  then  it  was  heard 
calling.  "Hist!"  he  said  to  it,  after  which  he  offered  it 
the  white  potato. 

Then  it  came  running. 

"Hist!  What  is  the  matter  with  you?"  to  it  said  (the 
manitou)  coming  (to  it). 

"Oh,  from  me  is  he  taking  the  white  potato!"  said  the 
Swan.  And  this  he  said:  "Why  is  he  not  himself  able 
to  procure  the  white  potato?"  he  was  told  by  the  other 
coming  hither. 

Now,  while  the  other  was  on  his  way  back,  in  hiding 
of  course  was  Nanabushu.  And  that  was  when  he  con 
tinued  on.  After  he  went  ashore,  he  then  left  behind  all 


28 


cigwa  kaga't  anipapimusa/t.  Kaga't  owabamigon  tindlsi- 
wan ;  cigwa  weyabamigut  tmdisiwan  ajinondagusinit.  Ka/r- 
jiniminamawat  'isi/u  mi'tigumin,  mldac  ka/ijiklckuwanit. 


Cigwa  mmawa  kipitcipa'tonit.  "  Ic !  anin  andiyan  ?" 
5  ogrrnan  Ini/u  tmdisiwan. 

O'o'widac  kri''kitu  £aca/u  tindisi :  "Nima'kamig  Ii8i/u 
mi'tigumin."  lA8a/u  tindisi  ogri'gon  :  "Anm  win  kaya  win 
manakacki'tot  Ci2i/u  mi'tigumin  ?"  Mldac  a'pl  mlnawa  klni- 
acakiwanit.  Mldac  cigwa  mlnawa  kimo'kit  'a8a/u  Nanabucu. 
10  Anic  animamadcat,  cigwa  tababandamawan  Ii8i/u  andanit. 
Kaga't  ki'tciwaya'kwagan.  Mldac  ajrcrdisat  madwa'i-ga- 
wan  i'i-ma  andanit.  Mldac  ka/rcita'pabamat  i'i'man  andanit, 
kunigimn  Ii8i/u  uka'kwananan  tcagika'a-minit !  Mldac  kana- 
wabamat,  kawin  kanaga  pmabislwan. 


15  Midac  caylgwa  kipasigwmit  migu  iu  aka'i'cawabisanik 
o'katini ;  mldac  ka/i  jipasigwlnit  migu  iu  ka/i'cicawabisanik 
o'katini  pimusanit.  Kagagu  po'kusaniwan,  kagasagu  kawi- 
sawan  anicagu  aswa'kwlwan.  Oo'widac  kri-'kitowan 
kanawabamat :  "  Awlyasa  ninganawabami'k."  Kri-'kito 

20  mlnawa,  o-o'widac  krr'kito :  a  Awlyasa  undcita  ningana 
wabami'k."  Mlnawa  ka'ijimadci'tad  kitcigika'a-nk  Ii8i/u 
uka'kwan.  Ka'ijipasigwlt  mri'gu  iu  ajicawabisanik  "ici/u 
u'katini ;  pimacigamanit  i'i-man  andanit,  ka/ijikawisanit. 
"Kaga't  nangwana  awiya  ninganawabamik."  Ka'piji'i'na- 

25   binit,   pitclnag  ka/ijiwabamigut   48i/u  ta'pabamat ;  o'o'widac 


29 

of  his  equipments.  After  he  had  gone  up  from  the  shore, 
he  then  truly  went  walking  along.  In  truth,  he  was 
observed  by  the  Bluejay;  as  soon  as  he  was  seen,  the 
Bluejay  was  heard  calling  out.  After  he  had  offered  it 
the  oak  acorn,  it  therefore  ceased  its  cries. 

Now  again  came  the  other  running.  "Hist!  What  is 
the  matter  with  you?"  he  said  to  the  Bluejay. 

And  this  said  the  Bluejay:  "He  took  from  me  the  oak 
acorn."  The  Bluejay  was  told  by  the  other :  "  Why  is 
he  not  himself  able  to  procure  the  oak  acorns  ?"  There 
upon  he  was  on  his  way  back  home.  Then  was  when 
again  Nanabushu  came  out  of  his  hiding.  Soon  on  his 
way  he  slowly  went,  till  presently  he  came  in  sight  of  the 
dwelling  of  the  being.  It  was  really  a  very  long  lodge. 
And  as  he  was  coming  up  to  him,  he  could  hear  him 
pounding  upon  something  in  where  he  lived.  And  so 
when  he  peeped  in  at  him  there  in  his  dwelling,  behold, 
it  was  upon  his  shins  that  he  was  hewing !  And  so  he 
watched  him,  but  not  a  look  did  the  other  cast  up  at  him. 

And  now  presently  the  other  started  to  rise  to  his  feet, 
whereupon  his  legs  were  bent ;  and  when  he  had  risen  to 
his  feet,  then  wabbling  were  his  legs  as  he  walked.  And 
nearly  were  they  on  the  point  of  breaking,  and  almost 
would  he  have  fallen  but  for  his  holding  on  to  something. 
And  this  he  said  as  (Nanabushu)  was  watching  him:  "By 
somebody  surely  am  I  watched,"  he  said.  He  spoke  again, 
and  this  he  said:  "By  somebody  surely  with  a  purpose 
am  I  watched."  Again  he  went  to  work  hewing  upon  his 
shin.  When  he  rose  to  his  feet  thereupon  bending  were 
his  legs ;  as  he  walked  beside  (the  fireplace)  there  where 
he  lived,  he  fell  over.  "Truly,  it  is  a  fact  that  by  some 
body  am  I  watched."  After  he  had  looked  up  towards 
(where  Nanabushu  was  peeping  in),  then  (Nanabushu)  was 
seen  peeping  in  at  him ;  and  this  was  what  was  told 


30 

ogri'gon    a"    Nanabucu,    ugrrgon :    "Pa'ka    a'kawa,   pama 
plndi^ka/kan  "  uoa'i'ofdn. 

1  '  O  O 

Mldac  ka'rcikanawabamat  cigwa  mlnawa  ugikanonigon, 
"Mri'-11  ijipmdigan,"  ugrrgon.  Mldac  kaegalt  ajipmdigat. 
5  Anlc  a'picimonikawan  ri'ma  tcinamadapit.  Kaga't  mi'i'ma11 
ka'i'conabit  o'o*widac  ogl'i'gon :  "Kagatsa,  Nanabucu, 
kimanito1  klpigacki'O'yan  i'i'wisa  wf  piwabamiyan.  Kamawln 
anica  kipijasi,"  ugri'gon. 


Ocrwidac  ugiinan :    "Anicasagu  nibrija,"  ugri'nan  'aca/u 
10  Nanabucu. 

"Kawm  anica  kibljasl,"  ugri'gon. 

Anlc  utanu'a-gunwa'tawan  48i/u  igut.  "Anicasagu  kipi- 
mawadisin,"  ugri'nan. 

"Kagatsa  kimanito1,  Nanabucu,"  ugrrgon. 

15  Anlc  misa  pisan  i'i'ma  kikakanonitiwat.  Ocrwidac 
ogl'i'nan :  "Wagunan  kin  kwa'taman  kisi/u  kanisigwiyamban?" 
ugi'i'nan. 

"Ml  nangwana  iu  gagat  anica  prijasiwan,"  ugl'i'gon. 

"Kawm,"    ugl*i*nan ;    "mini'kina   iu  anica  kitatacikanawa- 
20  bamin  idac,"   ugri'nan. 

"Aye8,"  o'd'dac  ogl'i'gon:  "Iwa  ojawaskwanwins  upigwa- 
ckunk  kaya  dac  plwanak  naba'i'gank,  mlsai  tcinisiguyamban. 
Na,  mri/>u  wlndamonan.  Kinidac,  Nanabucu?  Wagunani 
iu  kanisiguyamban  ?" 

25  Wo'5'widec  ugri'nan :  "Igi/u  ublwayackinag  pangigu 
tangickawagwa,  mlgu  iu  tcinibuyamban,"  ugri'nan.  Anicadac 
ugri'nan.  Kawm  kaga't  tcinibut,  iwisa  awansinini  'i8i/u 
kanisigut.  "Anlc,  misagu  ixiu  mini'k  kakanoninan." 


Nanabushu,  he  was  told:  "Wait  yet  a  while,  by  and  by 
come  in,"  he  was  told. 

And  so  after  he  had  been  watching  him,  then  was  he 
now  once  more  addressed:  "Now  come  on  in,"  he  was 
told.  Whereupon  truly  in  he  went.  Now  the  other  laid 
a  spread  there  for  him  to  sit  down  upon.  Truly,  as  he 
sat  there,  this  he  was  told:  "Quite  true,  Nanabushu,  are 
you  a  manitou  being,  since  you  were  able  to  come  here 
by  canoe  for  the  purpose  of  seeing  me.  I  suspect  that 
you  have  not  come  without  a  purpose,"  he  was  told. 

And  this  he  said  to  him:  "For  no  special  object  have 
I  come,"  to  him  said  Nanabushu. 

"Not  for  nothing  have  you  come,"  he  was  told. 

Naturally  he  tried  to  disavow  what  was  told  him.  "I 
have  come  only  to  make  you  a  visit,"  he  said  to  him. 

"Verily,  indeed,  you  are  a  manitou  being,  Nanabushu," 
he  was  told. 

So  therefore  in  a  friendly  way  they  there  conversed 
together.  And  this  (Nanabushu)  said  to  him:  "What  do 
you  fear  that  would  kill  you?"  he  said  to  him. 

"It  is  quite  evident  that  you  have  not  come  for  nothing," 
he  was  told. 

"Not,"  he  said  to  him,  "for  so  long  a  time  would  I 
merely  be  watching  you  (if  I  had  come  for  mischief),"  he 
said  to  him. 

"Yea,"  and  this  (Nanabushu)  was  told:  "It  is  a  tiny 
blue  missile  upon  an  arrow,  and  a  piece  of  flint  fastened 
on  for  a  spear,  by  such  should  I  be  killed.  Thus,  there 
fore,  have  I  told  you.  Now  about  yours,  Nanabushu?  What 
is  it  that  would  kill  you?" 

So  this  he  said  to  him  :  "  If  I  should  gently  touch  those 
cat-tails  with  my  foot,  then  would  I  die,"  he  said  to  him. 
Now,  he  was  only  deceiving  him.  He  was  truly  not 
destined  to  die,  that  was  not  the  thing  by  which  he  would 


32 

jipasigwlt  Ca8a/u  Nanabucu  ka'pri'jimadcat  rrman  utclma- 
ning.  Midac  caylgwa  krtrjrtat  48i/u  kawlndaminit  iu 
kanisigunit.  Mitac  'i8i/u  klpigwaku'kat.  Kaklci'tot,  midac 
sasa'twat  klmawinatank  49i/u  wlgiwam. 


5  "Micanim!"  ugri'gon  Nanabucu.  "  Mmangwana  gaga't 
pinantupanftawit,"  ugri'gon.  Minangwana  gu  iu  ka'pisa- 
ga*a-nk  madawananigubanan  48i/u  uplwayackina8 ;  klpincli- 
gananit  i'i*man  andanit.  Amc  midac  cigwa  pacwabandank 
48i/u  wlgiwam,  midac  sagisltagogubanan.  Midac  ka'i'jipim- 
10  wat  upi'kwananing,  wantcitagu  na'U'pi'kwan  ugrrninawan. 
Midac  kanljicawabipitonit  'i8i/u  ubikwa'k,  midac  ka/rjigwa- 
niblt ;  midac  wmi'tam  ka*i  jipimmija'irgut,  wlni'tam  ka'i'ji- 
pimugut  naarpi^kwan.  Amc  midac  kaya  win  ka/rcicawa- 
bipitot  Ii8i/u  ubikwa'kuni. 


15  Midac  rrma11  klwam'kat  'i8i/u  uta,  ningutci  ki'a-'tosig 
i'i'wisa  uta.  Amc  mrrman  pitclnag  klmi'kwandank  i'i'wisa 
ningutci  tcigra-'topan  i'O'ta.  Midac  kaijimadcinija'i'gat ; 
midac  a'pl  ani'a'timat,  ka'i'jipimwat.  Midac  wlni'tam 
ka'pi'i'ci'u'cimut.  Midac  a'timigut  ki'pimugut.  Anic  m'igu'ku 

20  ka'todank  cisi/u  kljababitot  cici/u  ubikwakuni.  Anic  wmi'tam 
ka*i*jimadcinicawat.  A'pri'dac  ani-a'tamat  ka'ijipimwat. 
Amc  mlgu  kljababitonit. 


Anic  misa  cigwa  minawa  wini'tam  kipiminica*u'gut,  cigwa 

minawa    uglpimwugon.      Midac    caylgwa    anawi    anagucini- 

25   nigubanan.       Midac    inandamitgubanan :    "Mlmawln    iu    tci- 

mamaji'i't,"  kri'nandam.      Anic  cigwa  upiminicawan,  midac 

minawa  kra'wipimwat.      Anic  mlgu'ku  kato'taminit  cawaba- 


33 

be  killed.  "Now,  this  is  all  that  I  have  to  say  to  you." 
After  which  to  his  feet  then  rose  Nanabushu,  who  came 
away  to  the  place  of  his  canoe.  Whereupon  he  began 
preparing  what  the  other  had  said  would  kill  him.  And 
so  he  made  the  arrows.  When  he  had  finished  them,  he 
then  gave  a  whoop  as  he  made  a  rush  upon  the  wigwam. 

"You  wretch!"  was  said  to  Nanabushu.  "It  is  really 
true  that  he  has  come  to  war  against  me,"  was  said  to 
(Nanabushu).  Now,  just  as  soon  as  (Nanabushu)  had  gone 
out,  then  was  when  he  began  drawing  the  cat-tails ;  he 
had  taken  them  inside  of  the  place  where  he  lived.  Now, 
when  (Nanabushu)  approached  the  wigwam,  he  then  ran 
out.  Whereupon  (Nanabushu)  shot  him  in  the  back, 
squarely  in  the  middle  of  the  back  he  hit  him.  And 
after  he  had  pulled  out  the  arrow,  then  (Nanabushu) 
retreated ;  it  was  then  his  turn  to  be  pursued,  and  his 
turn  to  be  shot  in  the  middle  of  the  back.  So  thereupon 
he  also  had  to  pull  out  the  other's  arrow. 

And  so  there  (Nanabushu)  forgot  his  heart,  somewhere 
he  had  put  that  heart  of  his.  Now,  it  was  at  that  very 
moment  that  it  occurred  to  him  that  he  should  have  put 
away  his  heart.  Thereupon  he  rushed  to  the  attack ;  and 
when  he  caught  up  with  (the  other),  he  then  shot  him.  And 
then  it  was  his  turn  to  run  away.  And  when  he  was  over 
taken,  he  was  shot.  Now  he  did  what  he  had  done  before, 
which  was  to  pull  out  the  other's  arrow.  So  then  in  turn 
he  pursued  him.  And  when  he  overtook  him,  he  shot 
him.  So  then  the  other  pulled  out  (the  arrow). 

So  then  another  time  was  (Nanabushu)  pursued,  now 
again  was  he  shot.  It  was  now,  to  be  sure,  growing 
evening.  And  this  was  his  thought  at  the  time:  "I  believe 
that  he  will  overcome  me,"  he  thought.  So,  then,  now  he 
chased  after  him,  and  then  again  he  went  and  shot  him. 
Now,  that  which  the  other  kept  on  doing  all  the  while  was 

3 — PUBL.    AMER.    ETHN.    SOC.    VOL.    VII. 


34 

bitonit  lisi/u  ubigwa'k.  Midac  mmawa  prircimut.  Midac 
ri'ma  pimawit.  Amc  mra/'ta  nijininig  Ini/u  ubigwa'kon, 
midac  wandcisagisit.  Ocrwidac  ugrrgon  Ini/u  Maman : 
"Anin  andiyan?"  ugrrgon  ini/u  Maman.  "Kwandigtikuca 
5  kimawi  Nanabucu?" 


"Aye8,  anic  misa7  nibuyan,   nicimisa." 

"Anin  ka'tiyan  kanibuyan?  O*o*  icitcigan  ;  kawm  kita- 
nisasl  rrman  wlyawing  anuglpimwat.  Nacka,  i'i'ma  ici- 
pimwat  usagipinwaning." 

10  Mldac  kaegalt  ka'ijicictcigat.  O'5'widac  a'pianiatimat 
Ii8i/u  ka-ijipimwat,  kagagu  uml'kunamawan  Ii8i/u  usagipan- 
wanini,  mldac  kaga  ka'i  jipangicininit.  O'O'widac  ogrrgon : 
"Anlndi  a'ka  ana*a-yan,  Nanabucu?" 


ttAyes,"    ogri'nan.      "Ta^wanrnac  i'pitawan  lni/we  anwm 
15   magadingin."      Mldac    ka'rcigwanipit.      Mldac    a'ta    pacig- 
waninig    48i/u    ubigwa'k    mldac    manu    wasa    ugra^'pa'a-n. 
Cigwa  minawa  uglpimwugon,  kayabi  pa'tanma'tiniwan  lni/u 
upigwa'kuni.      Mldac  ka-ijiabami'tawat ;   midac  manu  pacu 
ka'i'ci'u'ndinawat.      Mldac    ka'i'jimicutamawat    lisi/u    utaski- 
20  bawanansan.        Mldac      ka'i'jipangicininit      ka'i'jisasa'kwat. 
Kapangicininit,      mldac     ajimawinanat     ka'i'jitangickawat ; 
ka'i-ji'a'capa'tot.      Minawa    ka/rjimawinanat    minawa  kltan- 
gickawat ;   minawa  ka'i'ji'a'japa'tot ;   minawa  ka-i^jima/rna- 
nat;    minawa    ka'ijitangickawat ;    minawa  ka/rjrajapa'tot ; 
25   minawa    ajimawinanat,   ka/ijitangickawat.      "Misa  iu  ka'iji- 
tcigat     'asa/u     anicinapa     tci-a^ni-a^kiwang ;     misa    niywing 
kitangickawat ;     misa     iu     mini'k     ka'U'ndiniit     'a8a/u     inini 
i'i'wisa  tcimigatit." 


35 

to  bend  the  arrow.  And  so  again  (Nanabushu)  ran  away. 
And  then  to  yonder  place  he  came  weeping.  Now  there 
were  but  two  of  his  arrows  left,  and  that  was  the  reason 
why  he  became  afraid.  Now,  this  was  he  told  by  the 
Red-headed  Woodpecker:  "What  is  the  matter  with  you?" 
he  was  told  by  the  Red-headed  Woodpecker.  "Is  it  possi 
ble  that  you  are  really  crying,  Nanabushu?" 

"Yes,  for  now  am   I  going  to  die,   my  little  brother." 

"  Why  is  it  that  you  should  die  ?  This  you  should  do  •, 
not  could  you  kill  him  if  you  should  shoot  him  here  in  the 
body  (as  you  have  been  doing).  But  rather,  the  place  for 
you  to  shoot  him  is  in  the  wrap  of  his  knot  of  hair." 

Therefore  truly  that  was  what  (Nanabushu)  did.  And 
now  when  he  overtook  him,  he  shot  him,  and  he  nearly 
hit  the  wrap  of  his  hair-knot,  whereupon  the  other  almost 
fell.  Then  this  was  he  asked  by  the  other:  "Where  is 
the  target  you  are  trying  to  hit,  Nanabushu?" 

"Yea,"  he  said  to  him.  "In  many  a  place  are  arrows 
likely  to  fall  during  a  battle."  Thereupon  he  turned  and 
fled.  And  since  there  was  but  a  single  arrow  left,  he 
then  with  good  reason  ran  a  long  way  off.  Then  again 
was  he  shot  by  the  other,  who  yet  had  many  arrows. 
Thereupon,  turning  about,  he  chased  him;  and  then  after 
he  ran  as  close  as  possible  upon  him  (to  make  sure  of 
success),  he  then  shot,  hitting  his  small  head-gear.  And 
as  he  fell  (Nanabushu)  whooped.  After  he  had  fallen, 
then  (Nanabushu)  rushed  upon  him,  and  kicked  him  ;  then 
he  ran  back.  Again  he  rushed  upon  him ;  again  he 
kicked  him ;  again  he  ran  back ;  again  he  rushed  upon 
him ;  again  he  kicked  him ;  again  he  ran  back ;  again  he 
rushed  upon  him,  (and  again)  he  kicked  him.  "Thus  shall 
the  people  do  till  the  end  of  the  world ;  thus  four  times 
shall  they  kick  (an  enemy);  thus  shall  the  number  be 
when  men  obtain  (honor)  from  one  another  in  war." 


36 

Mldac  a'pl  48i/u  ka/rjimadci'tat  klpa'kunang  Ii8i/u  utuctig- 
wanim.  Mldac  ka/rjipasank  48i/u  utuctigwanim.  Mldac 
a'pl  kapa'tanig  48i/u  utuctigwanini  mldac  a'pl  clgwa  ka'pi- 
klwat.  Mldac  clgwa  mmawa  kf  pra'cawa'irt  48i/u  kistcigami. 
5  Kawlndac  kayabi  oglwabamasln  !ni/u  Tmdlsiwan  kaya  Ini/u 
Wa8wan,  mldac  ka'pljiniminawa-u't ;  kawln  kayapi  ugiwa- 
bamasm  Ini/u  Kistci'O'gawan  kayasagu  Ini/u  pigiwan.  Kawi- 
nisagu  kago  oglwabandazin  48i/u  mini'k  ka'a'ni'ijat  ani- 
madcat.  A'pl  dac  pagawat,  mldac  ciofvva  kri'nandank : 

JT  •  IT    •  O  •  O 

10  "'lYwisa  ka'ijictcigat  Ia8a/u  anicinapa  tci-a'ni'a'kiwank," 
kri''kito.  Midac  alpl  patagwicing,  "Amantcigic  ka'ijayan," 
krrnandam.  Ogiwabama  'isi/u  anicinaba8  udanawi'tonit, 
mldac  kaga/t  cixgwa  wlnasi'kawat  'i8i/u  anicinaba8.  Mldac 
ka/i'jra'ca'tat.  Kago  nangana  utAiyan.  Anlc  mldac  ka'iji- 

15  ki'kiwa/u-ni'kat  midac  Ii8i/u  utansiyanic  kanima'kwa'a'nk. 
Mldac  ka/rjrrnacit  anicinaban  ayanit.  Mldac  kaanrrjina- 
gamut,  anlc  wu*o-  kiinandam :  "  Wagutugwanigic  ka/irm- 
bi'i'gogwan  wa8a/u  anicinaba?  Mlsa  o  ka'U'mbri'gut,  ka'kina 
pamadisit  uga'crmbrrgun,"  kriilkito.  Na,  mldac  alpi  cigwa 

20  bacwabamat  'i8i/u  anicinaba",  mldac  cigwa  klanimadciyank  ; 
o*o*widac  krrna*a/m  anlc  miguna  iu  utaciyanic  kanaga- 
ma'tot : 


"Wagunan  wagunan  wayaninabigamug? 
Ya  aha  yo  hu  yointca. 

25  Wagunan  wagunan  wayaninabigamug? 

Ya  aha  yo  hu  yointca." 

Mldac  ka/rciwabamigut  Ini/u  anicinaban.    "Mlmawin  (aca/u 
Nanabucu !"       Kri^kitowag    lgi/u    anicinabag.       "Wagunan 
kinawa  kitinandam   'i8i/u  panlma'kwa'a'nk?'5 
30        "Mlsa    Ii8i/u,    nintinandam,    udaciyanic  kamma'kwa'a-nk." 

"Anlc,  kaya  i-i'man  tabajlc  kago  uglnlma'kwa'a'nini !" 


37 

Thereupon  he  then  began  removing  the  skin  from  the 
head  of  his  (slain).  And  then  he  dried  that  one's  head. 
And  after  that  one's  head  was  dry,  he  then  started  back 
home.  So  now  back  he  came  over  the  sea  in  his  canoe. 
And  not  again  saw  he  the  Bluejay  and  the  Swan,  so 
then  straight  out  to  sea  he  went ;  and  not  again  saw  he 
the  Great  Pike  and  also  the  pitch.  And  nothing  else 
he  saw  of  the  many  things  that  had  been  in  his  way  as 
he  went  along.  And  while  he  was  on  his  homeward  way, 
this  now  he  thought:  "This  is  what  the  people  shall  do 
till  the  end  of  the  world,"  he  said.  And  when  he  was 
arriving  home,  "I  wonder  if  I  should  go  thither,"  he  thought. 
He  saw  where  some  people  were  living  in  a  town,  where 
upon  truly  he  then  desired  to  go  where  the  people  were. 
Thereupon  he  turned  back.  Not  a  thing  did  he  have. 
So  when  he  made  a  flag,  it  was  his  old  soiled  clout  that 
he  had  raised  upon  a  staff.  And  then,  carried  along  with 
the  wind,  he  went  to  where  the  people  were.  And  as  he 
went  along,  he  sang,  for  this  he  thought:  "I  wonder  what 
would  rouse  the  feelings  of  these  people?  By  this  shall 
they  be  aroused,  all  that  live  shall  be  stirred,"  he  said. 
So  while  he  was  now  approaching  the  people,  he  then 
began  singing ;  and  this  he  sang,  for  it  was  to  his  old 
soiled  clout  that  he  sang : 

"What,  what  is  that  which  suspended  from  two  corners  hangs  so  limp? 
Ya  aha  yo  hu  yointca 

"What,  what  is  that  which  suspended  from  two  corners  hangs  so  limp? 
Ya  aha  yo  hu  yointca." 

Thereupon  he  was  seen  by  the  people.  "That  must 
be  Nanabushu!"  said  the  people.  "What  do  you  imagine 
that  is  which  as  he  comes  he  has  raised  upon  a  staff?" 

"That  is,  I  think,  his  old  soiled  clout  which  he  has  raised 
upon  a  staff." 

"  Why,  there  below  is  something  else  he  has  upon  the  staff!" 


38 

Kunigimn,  a'pl  rrma  agwa-a'cinit  Ini/u  Nanabucuwan, 
kuniginln  anicinaba  uctigwan  uglnlma'kwa'a-mlni.  Mldac 
ka-i-'kitot:  "Mlsa  Io8o  ka-o'mbrrguyag  anicinabatug." 

Mri'dac    kaga/t    ka/rciwabatinig.      Kawm   ganaga  pang! 

5   klnibaslwag   cigwa  klki'kino'a'maguwat  48i/u  katijictcigawat. 

lO8owidac    krr'kito    waVu    Nanabucu  :    "Misawa  ki'tcikac- 

kandank    'a8a/u    anicinaba    mlgu    iu  ka-ijipapagwadandank, 

taya     pa'kawizl.       Mlsa     iu     ka'ijictcigat     lasa/u     anicinaba 


10  Mldac  a'pl  cfgwa  klmadcat  kra-ndawabamat  !ni/u  o'ku- 
misan;  cirgwa  ugl'u'disan  Ini/u  o'kumisan,  o'o'widac  ogri'nan: 
"Hala/n,  no'ko,  mamawicin,  no'ko!" 

Mldac  kaegact  ka'todank   Ia5:a/u   mindimoya. 
Mldac    ka-i-lkitot    Ia8a/u    Nanabucu:    "Mlsa    iu    katotatit 
15    lasa/u  anicinaba  tci-a-ni-a^klwank  ;  kaga't  ogasagi'ton  'aV11 
anicinaba   48i/u  tcrafni-a^kiwank  ;   misawa  ki'tcikackandank, 
mlgu  iu  tciwabinamowind  Wu  agackandamowin  wabandank 
48i/u     anicinaba     uctigwan.      Misawa    kago    papamandasik, 
po'tc    ka'kina    awiya    agacopi'i'gun    Ii8i/u    nindicictcigawin. 
20  Kaga't    ugapapagwatcri'gunawa  Igi/u  anicinabag,"  krr'kito 
'a8a/u  Nanabucu. 


Wo'o'  ugri'gon  Ini/u  o'kumisan:  "Mamindaga  kigri*nigapa' 
'a8a/u  pamatisit  48i/u  tcitotatit.  Nacka  *isi/u  wantcrrninan. 
Nacka  iu  kimawinanat  wasau  kitcikiwansi,  lisi/u  kimawinanat 
25  lisiwidec  tcitotatit  Ia8a/u  pitclnag  kanipimatisit  li8iVidac 
wandcri-ninan  ;  Igi/u  abinotciyag,  na,  mlwagugi/u  anigi'a'twa. 
Nax,  misa  iu  nln  ajiwabandaman,"  ugri'gon  Ini/u  o'kumisan. 


39 

Lo,  when  to  yonder  shore  drifted  Nanabushu,  behold, 
a  hitman  head  he  had  upon  a  staff.  Thereupon  he  said  : 
"Now  by  this  will  you  be  stirred  to  feelings  of  joy,  O  ye 
people !" 

It  was  true  that  was  what  happened.  Not  for  a  moment 
did  they  sleep  while  they  were  being-  taught  the  things 
which  they  were  to  do.  And  this  said  Nanabushu:  "Even 
though  grievously  sad  the  people  may  be,  yet  they  will 
find  consolation  in  this,  they  will  cease  from  their  sadness. 
Therefore  this  shall  the  people  do  till  the  end  of  the 
world." 

So  thereupon  he  started  upon  his  way  to  find  his  grand 
mother  ;  soon  he  came  to  where  his  grandmother  was, 
and  this  he  said  to  her :  "  Come,  my  grandmother,  relieve 
me  of  this,  my  grandmother!" 

It  was  true  that  was  what  the  old  woman  did. 

And  this  was  what  Nanabushu  said:  "This  is  what  the 
people  shall  do  to  one  another  till  the  end  of  the  world ; 
truly,  the  people  shall  be  fond  of  (doing)  it  till  the  end 
of  the  world ;  no  matter  how  bitterly  sad  they  may  be, 
yet  they  will  be  relieved  of  sadness  when  they  behold  the 
human  head.  No  matter  what  may  be  the  object  of  their 
concern,  yet  of  necessity  all  are  bound  to  find  joy  in  this 
that  I  have  done.  Verily,  from  all  their  cares  will  the 
people  be  relieved  by  it,"  said  Nanabushu. 

This  was  he  told  by  his  grandmother:  "Vast  harm 
have  you  wrought  upon  the  living  of  the  future  by  causing 
them  to  do  such  a  thing.  Listen  to  the  reason  why  I 
tell  you.  On  account  of  that  act  of  yours  when  you 
attacked  your  brother,  that  by  your  attacking  him  so 
should  the  living  to  come  do  to  one  another,  is  the  reason 
why  I  tell  you  this ;  the  children,  I  say,  are  the  ones 
whom  you  have  harmed.  Such,  therefore,  is  the  way  I 
look  upon  it,"  he  was  told  by  his  grandmother. 


4o 

"Aye8,"  ugri-nan  'a8a/u  Nanabushu.  "Anlc  kawm  nin- 
dakackitos!  48i/u  tciminutcigayamban.  Anlc,  aja  nlngipa- 
'tatciga  lisi/u  nangwana  48i/u  kltotaman,"  ugrrnan  ini/u 
o'kumisan.  "Anlc,  mngaglbatis  magwa  apinotclwiyan," 
5  kri-'kito  wasa/u  Nanabucu.  Krr'kito :  "Anic  kawm  atata 
ningltananagatawatanzl.  Kaegalt  kitabwe,  no'ko,  lisi/u  a'ki- 
toyan,"  ogi'i'nan  mi/u  o'kumisan. 


Ml    a'kawa    ka'i'nat  mi/u  o'kumisan.      Midac  a'pi  karna- 
dcat,   mldac  rrman   kiundcimadcat  idac  anodcigu  kipapa'i'- 
10  jitcigat.       Mldac     miziwa     kl'ijat     'oso/u    a'ki.       Nackadac 
ka'ijictcigat  o*o'man  a'king. 


5.  NANABUSHU  AND  THE  WINGED  STARTLERS. 

Mldac    caylgwa    anibapimusat   ningutingigu  oglwabaman 
awiya  ukucininit.      "Kuniga  klwPsumwatug  ?"  ugrrnan  lifii/u 
wayabamat.      "Mlnanga,"  ugrrgon ;  "o'o*  ninticini'kasomin, 
15   kuckungasinag,   nindigomin." 


"Kagatsa,  minangwani  iu  acinikasoyag !"  Midac  ka'i'ci- 
mltcinat,  'o^oMac  ka/rcrrnat :  "Wa8au  kucaya'ta  kuckun- 
gasi,  ugo  kucaya'ta,"  ugri'nan.  Mldac  kanijimadcat,  kra'- 
nibapimusat.  Ka'i'cimatapit  Ii8i/u  ki'tcigami,  uglwabandan 
20  ki'tciklckapi'kanig ;  inapit,  kaga't  nawinagwatini  iwidi 
nibllkang.  "  Undcitamawm  ninda'i'cikwackwan  i^kwatug 
abating;  a'pitcigu  tata'kuntclgwanat.  Undcitamawln  nin- 


"Yea,"  to  her  said  Nanabushu.  "So  I  have  not  suc 
ceeded  in  bringing  (them)  a  source  of  joy.  Now  com 
pletely  have  I  erred,  though  no  harm  was  intended  in 
what  I  did,"  he  said  to  his  grandmother.  "Thus  I  was 
exceedingly  foolish  while  I  was  yet  a  child,"  said  Nana 
bushu.  He  said:  "Of  course  I  did  fully  realize  the  effect 
of  my  act.  Of  a  truth,  you  are  in  the  right,  my  grand 
mother,  concerning  what  you  say,"  he  said  to  his  grand 
mother. 

This  was  what  he  first  said  to  his  grandmother.  And 
so  then  was  the  time  that  he  started  away,  and  from 
there  he  travelled  about  doing  all  manner  of  things.  And 
now  everywhere  over  the  earth  he  went.  For  look  and 

see  what  he  has  done  here  upon  earth. 

« 

5.  NANABUSHU  AND  THE  WINGED  STARTLERS.* 

And  now,  while -he  was  walking  along,  he  suddenly  saw 
something  lying  [together]  in  a  heap.  "I  should  like  to 
know  if  perchance  you  have  a  name?"  he  said  to  the 
creatures  which  he  saw.  "To  be  sure,"  he  was  told-, 
"this  is  our  name,  little  winged  startlers,  such  are  we 
called." 

"Oh,  indeed,  so  that  is  what  you  are  called!"  Where 
upon,  after  he  had  eased  himself  upon  them,  this  he  then 
said  to  them :  "This  is  really  the  only  winged  startler, 
this  is  the  only  thing,"  he  said  to  them.  Thereupon  on 
his  way  he  started,  on  his  way  he  went  walking.  When 
he  came  out  upon  the  sea,  he  saw  a  very  high  cliff  with 
steep  sides ;.  as  he  looked,  truly  far  seemed  the  distance 
down  to  where  the  water  was.  "With  good  reason  would 
I  leap  down  if  a  woman  were  up  for  a  prize,  particularly 
if  she  were  short  from  knee  to  groin.  With  good  reason 

t  For  another  version  see  No.  24. 


42 

taijikwackwan :  ^wagwan  ka/rjikwackwanigwan?'  i^kitung. 
Undcitamawm  ninta'ijikwackwan."  Migirrma  a'kuklbabi- 
'kanig  nlbawit.  Oo'dac  totam,  mlzan  ajiwaninigatanit. 

Mldac     clgwa     kru'disat    a'a'wati    kamldcinimint    mri/<u 
5   umtcanisa8.      "Anm  ka'tiyag?"  udina8  48i/u  umtcanisas. 

"Ka,  nangwana  Nanabucu  ninglmldcinigunan." 

"Ningutano  mawm  inawaguban." 

"Kawm,"  kri*lkito  lasa/u  paji'k  i-i'man  mowing  usibi'tot. 
"Kaga't  ningagwatcimigunan,  ;Anm  ajini'kasoyag?'  ningl- 
10  "i'gunan.  O'5'widac  ningrrnanan,  'Kuckungasmag  ninti- 
gomin,'  ningri-nanan.  Oo'widac  kri*(kito :  'Nabisa  kuc- 
kungasi!'  ningri'gunan ;  mldac  ka'ijimamackitciciyangit, 
mldac  ka'a'nicimadcat." 

Wa'a'widac  wanitcanisit  ka'i'cikislbiginat ;  ka'i'ckwa  kisl- 

15   blginat,    clgwa  ka/ijimadcat.      "Micanim!"  ugri'nan   Nana- 

bucuwan.    Mldac  ka'i'cra'dimat  i'i'man  kickabi'kang,  mldac 

pacu     uglunsabaman.       Mldac     ka'i'nanimat :     "Wrkagasa 

mlnawa  tawaninigatani." 

Clgwa      kaga't      umbigatani      Nanabucu.        "Undcltasa 
20  ninta'i'jikwackwan      ningutwa'kwa'a/gan      a'kwutclngwanat 
a'tating." 


Mldac  ka'ijipasigwa'u't  laca/u  pina,  mldac  ka'ijikwac- 
kwaninit  rrman  kickabi'kang.  Mldac  i'i-ma  ka-i'ciponlt 
kanawabamat  animibisu^iit ;  mldac  i'i'witi  nibrkang  ka'iji- 
25  pangicininit.  Mldac  rrman  ka'u'nsabimat,  kaga't  kabaya'r 
kri'nandiwan  rrman  nibrkang;  wi'ka  ayagosit.  Undcimo- 
'kisawan,  mlgu  iwiti  kabmabinit ;  o'o'widac  ogri'gon  : 


43 

would  I  leap  down  if  some  one  should  ask:  'Who  will 
jump  down?'  With  good  reason  then  would  I  leap  down." 
There  on  the  very  brink  of  the  cliff  he  stood.  Now,  this 
happened  to  him :  as  he  started  to  jump,  he  lost  his  footing. 

And  so  in  the  mean  time  (the  mother)  had  come  to 
where  her  young  had  been  eased  upon.  "What  has  hap 
pened  to  you?"  she  said  to  her  children. 

"Why,  it  was  by  that  old  Nanabushu  that  we  were 
eased  upon." 

"Something  or  other  must  you  have  said  to  him." 

"Nay,"  said  one  moving  about  there  in  the  slush  of  the 
dung.  "Truly,  we  were  asked,  'What  is  your  name?'  we 
were  told.  And  this  was  what  we  said  to  him,  'Little 
winged  startlers  are  we  called,'  we  said  to  him.  And  this 
he  said:  'Like  the  deuce  (you  are)  little  winged  frighteners ! ' 
we  were  told  by  him  ;  whereupon  he  squirted  at  us,  after 
which  he  went  his  way." 

Then  the  mother  washed  them  with  water ;  and  after 
she  had  finished  washing  them,  she  then  started  away. 
"Confound  him!"  she  said  of  Nanabushu.  And  so  after 
she  had  overtaken  him  yonder  at  the  cliff,  then  close  by 
she  took  a  peep  at  him.  Now,  this  was  her  thought  of 
him:  "I  wish  that  again  he  would  swing  his  leg." 

Now,  sure  enough,  up  Nanabushu  raised  his  leg.  "For 
a  purpose  would  I  leap  if  the  object  of  the  prize  measured 
one  span  of  the  hand  from  groin  to  knee." 

Thereupon  as  up  flew  the  ruffed  grouse,  then  (Nana 
bushu)  leaped  off  the  steep  cliff.  And  so  after  she  had 
alighted  there  (on  the  edge),  she  watched  him  as  he  went 
falling ;  and  then  yonder  into  the  water  he  fell.  And  so 
from  there  she  kept  watch  of  him,  truly  a  long  while  was 
he  gone  in  the  water ;  a  long  time  was  she  perched  up 
there.  When  he  came  to  the  surface,  straightway  at 
yonder  place  he  cast  a  look ;  now  this  was  she  told  by 


44 

"Kagatsa  kikuckungasP,"  ugrrgon.  Mldac  ka'rciklwat 
lasa/u  pina ;  mldac  kayawln  ka-rcimadciyatagat,  mlsa  ka/r- 
ci'a-gwa;tat.  Mldac  mlnawa  kra-nimadcat. 


6.   NANABUSHU  AND  THE  DANCING  BULLRUSHES. 

Ninguting    papimusat,   "Anln?"  kri'nandam.      "Kunigii?" 

5   O'o'widac    krrnandam :    "Kuniga    kawm    ningakackitosin." 

Ningutingigu    papimusat,    uglwabama    *isi/u    ininiwac    kistci- 

•o'samininit  wlnlmi'i'tiwa8.      O'o'widac  ogri'gon  !ni/u  pacig  : 

"Anln  kaya  klnina,    Nanabucu,   klgamm  ?"  uglgon. 


"Aye8,   nisimsa  nmganim  kayanm,"  ugri'nan. 

10  Ka'kina  pingwacagitiwa8,  mldac  ka'kina  acrirnit  i''i'u 
papikwangana  pata'kibinwa'irnit.  "Kaya  klnina  klwlnim  ?" 
krrna  Ia8a/u  Nanabucu.  "Minagu  iu  itug  cigwa  wlwito- 
'kasoyan?  Kinondamina  mini'k  'iYwisa  mini'k  wanlmrrtink? 
Nicwasugin  wlnimi'i'tim." 


15  Mldac  kaya  win  ka'rcrirt,  kipata'kibinwa'U't.  Mldac 
alpi  madci'tanit,  nawayal  ka'ijocigabawit  kayawln  klnlmit. 
Mldac  alp!  kimadci'tanit,  anic  mlsa  gaya  win  ri'man  ka-i'n- 
daciwacimut ;  babanaginanga  ina'kamigisiwa8.  Kagatsa 
kistcinlmiitiwa  i*i'man.  Mldac  i*i'man  andaciwacimut,  nlyo- 

20  gun    kanlmit.      Anic    rrrna"    wldci'a't   i'ix'wisa  kanro'guna- 


45 

him:  "Of  a  truth,  you  are  a  winged  startler,"  she  was 
told.  Thereupon  back  home  went  the  ruffed  grouse ;  and 
as  for  himself  he  started  swimming  inshore,  after  which 
he  then  went  out  of  the  water.  Thereupon  again  he 
started  on  his  way. 

6.   NANABUSHU  AND  THE  DANCING  BuLLRusHES.1 

While  he  was  once  walking  along,  "  What  (is  it)  ?"  he 
thought.  "  Wonder  (what  it  can  be)  ?"  Now,  this  he 
thought:  "I  wonder  if  I  am  unable  to  do  it!"  And  as 
he  was  once  walking  along,  he  saw  some  men  gathered 
in  a  throng  to  dance  together.  And  this  he  was  asked 
by  one  of  them:  "You  too,  Nanabushu,  are  you  going 
to  dance?"  he  was  asked. 

"Yes,  my  little  brother,  I  too  am  going  to  dance,"  he 
said  to  him. 

They  were  all  naked;  and  the  only  dress  they  all  had 
was  a  feather,  with  all  but  the  top  stripped  from  the  shaft, 
standing  perched  upon  their  heads.-  "And  do  you  also 
wish  to  dance?"  they  said  to  Nanabushu.  "Without  doubt 
it  must  be  your  wish  to  participate?  Have  you  heard 
how  many  days  they  will  be  dancing?  Eight  days  will 
they  be  dancing." 

Thereupon  he  himself  dressed  in  the  same  costume,  he 
had  a  feather  standing  upon  his  head.  Now,  when  they 
began,  in  their  midst  was  where  he  stood  and  also  danced. 
Now,  when  the  others  began  (dancing),  thereupon  then 
and  there  did  he  dance ;  a  rousing  time  did  they  have. 
Of  a  truth,  a  great  dance  they  had  together  there.  And 
now,  there  where  he  was  dancing,  four  days  did  he  dance. 
So  there  he  helped  them  for  a  space  of  four  days.  And 

t  For  another  version  see  No.  22. 


46 

gatnik.      Mldac    a'pl  krrnint :    "Ambasano  ayangwamisin," 
kri-na  au   Nanabucu.      "Kagu'  nonda'a-nicrtangan." 

Mldac  a'pl  cigwa  krtrjrirnit  -,  ka'ijimiskwa'kwiyuwanit, 
anlc  mlgu  gaya  win  ka/ijru't  Ia8a/u  Nanabucu.  Kinani- 
5  mit  ml'i'ma,  anlc  kawln  anawi  maci  aya'kusisl.  Mldac 
kaga't  anigu'k  nlminit.  Aba'pic  kaningutwasugunagatinik, 
mldac  a'pl  aniwabaninig,  cigwa  ki'kandank  aya'kusit. 
Mlgu  iu  ajislgisanig  uckmcigun.  Kagatsa  nanontantam  tcib- 
wawabininig.  Kaga'pri'gu  ki'tcimawi  Ii8i/u  a'pl'tcitibi'katinig. 
10  Mldac  Ii9i/u  tcl'i'ckwanlmi'i'tlng  aniwabaninig.  Misa7  agawa 
ugacki'ton  anummit,  anlc  aya'kuzi.  Cayigwa  anawi  plta- 
banini,  mlsa  caylgwa  nanawatcimunit.  Mldac  anawi  cigwa 
piwabaninig,  anlc  mlgu  iu  ajinasina  mawit,  a'pltci  aya'kusit. 


Ningutingigu,    ackwawabiniganit,    klnlbawi    magwa  caca- 
15   ganacku'ka,    anlc    ka'i'cinaguskank  lni/u  cacaganackan  ml- 
nangwuna    lni/u    ka'ijinank.      Mldac    kaga't    nanondantam 
tcibwawabaninig,    mldac    acimawit,    a'pltci    aya'kusit.      Nin 
gutingigu  lisi/u  a'kawabandank  tcibiwabaninig,  cigwa  kaga't 
owabandan    piwabaninig.      Mldac  ka'rnandank :    "  Ambagic 
20  ka-i-citina     kipimipaga'kabank."       Mri'dac     kaga't     cigwa 
tibickotcayaT    pimra-'kwabanini.      Anlc    mlgu   iu  mo'kwici- 
mut.    Mldac  inabit ;  kaga't  rrma  mbawit,  kuniginln  magwa 
cacaganaguckulka  klnlbawi.    Mlsandawa  acinatagama'a-yat. 


47 

that  was  when  they  said  to  him:  "We  beg  of  you,  display 
your  zeal,"  they  said  to  Nanabushu.  "Don't  let  up  before 
the  affair  is  over." 

Now,  that  was  when  they  began  to  paint  themselves ; 
after  they  were  painted  red,  then  the  same  to  himself 
did  Nanabushu.  He  kept  right  on  dancing  there  at  the 
place,  for  not  even  yet  was  he  weary.  And  so  truly  with 
much  fervor  he  danced.  By  the  time  the  sixth  day  was 
up,  and  when  the  light  of  morning  was  coming  on,  he 
began  to  realize  that  he  was  growing  tired.  Thereupon 
the  tears  streamed  from  his  eyes.  In  good  earnest  was 
he  anxious  for  the  morning  to  come.  Then  at  last  he 
wept  aloud  for  that  the  night  was  yet  far  from  spent. 
And  now  the  dance  would  be  over  during  the  coming-on 
of  the  morning.  And  so  hardly  was  he  able  to  dance, 
for  he  was  tired.  By  and  by,  nevertheless,  the  dawn 
began  to  break,  whereupon  the  others  then  began  whooping. 
In  spite  of  the  breaking  of  the  dawn,  he  was  nevertheless 
weeping  all  the  while,  so  very  tired  was  he. 

Now  presently,  after  the  others  had  ceased  with  their 
music,  there  he  was  standing  in  amongst  the  bullrushes, 
for  what  he  had  met  with  was  the  bullrushes,  which 
he  had  supposed  (to  be  people  dancing).  It  was  true 
that  he  had  grown  restless  before  it  was  morning,  and 
so  he  was  weeping,  he  was  so  tired.  But  of  a  sudden, 
while  waiting  for  the  morrow,  he  then  truly  saw  the  coming 
of  the  morning.  And  this  is  what  he  thought:  "Would 
that  at  once  the  full  light  of  day  might  appear!"  Where 
upon  truly  now  straight  overhead  had  come  the  line  of 
the  morning  light.  Now,  by  that  time  he  was  tired  out 
by  reason  of  the  dance.  And  so  he  looked  ;  truly,  there 
where  he  was  standing,  to  his  surprise,  was  in  among  the 
bullrushes.  On  recognizing  (what  he  had  been  dancing 
with),  he  made  his  way  close  to  the  shore.  Thereupon 


48 

Mldac  nangwana  Ini/u  ka*i  jinank  cacaganackon  anicinabank 
ka/rjinank.  Minangwana  iya'plku  48i/u  kra'nitagwagik 
minangwana  Ii8i/u  klki'tcinanotink.  Minangwana  Ini/u  ka- 
krrcinank  !ni/u  cacaganackon.  Na,  mldac  inangwana 
5  rrma  wawiyac  ki'i'ciwabisit. 


7.   NANABUSHU,  THE  SWEET-BRIER  BERRIES,  AND  THE 
STURGEONS. 

Anic,    mlsa    kani'i'cimamadcat.      Ningutingigu    ka'i'ciwa- 

bamat    4si/u    anicinaba    wltagwagicinit,    mldac    ka'i'cri'nat : 

"Ambasano,   niclmisa,"  ugrrna   ti8i/u  anicinaba8.      Uglwaba- 

man    kigo^kanit,    anic    mldac    kaya    win    rrma    wra'yat, 

10  o'O'widac  ugri'nan :    "Ambasano  kawltcitagwagicimin." 


"Awawa,"  ugri'gon. 

Mldac  ka/rciwitigamat.  Anic  unisawa8  klngonya8  i 
tagwagiciwat.  Aba'pic  cigwa  kackatininig,  anic  mlsa 
H-man  piboniciwat.  Anic  ayawa8  unldcanisiwa8.  Abalpic 
15  cigwa  gatamwawat  Ci8i/u  uglgonimiwa.  Mldac  o-o-  ka'i*nat 
Ini/u  uwldigamaganan :  "Indawa  sana,  kini'tamawa  lgi/u 
kiglngonimiwa  klgagitamwananig ;  pamadac  nmawint  ickwatc 
klgatamwananig." 


Midac  gaga't  ka'rcictcigawat.      Anic  mlsa7  kaga't  ka'i'ji- 
20   -a/mwawat    48i/u    ugigon'i'mini.      Aba'pic   kadamwawat  'i8i/u 
klngonya8.      Mldac    a'pl  ka'kidamwawad  Ini/u  uwldigamaga 
nan    oglgoirnini,    iniwisa   utagamida'kawaganan,  anic  mlga- 
lkina    48i/u    uglgonimini ;    mldac  kai'ciniskadisltawat,  mldac 


49 

it  became  a  fact  that  he  had  taken  the  bullrushes  for 
people.  It » happened  to  be  in  the  autumn,  during-  the 
season  when  there  was  always  a  strong  wind  blowing. 
It  was  true  that  such  was  the  way  he  had  seen  the  bull- 
rushes.  Therefore  that  was  a  time  when  he  had  a  joke 
played  on  him. 

7.   NANABUSHU,  THE  SWEET-BRIER  BERRIES,  AND  THE 

STURGEONS.1 

Well,  accordingly  then  went  he  slowly  along  his  way. 
And  once  after  he  had  seen  where  some  people  were 
intending  to  spend  the  autumn,  he  then  said  to  them : 
"I  beg  of  you,  my  younger  brothers,"  he  said  to  the  people. 
He  saw  them  engaged  in  catching  fish,  so  naturally  desired 
to  remain  there  too,  and  this  he  said  to  them:  "I  beg 
that  you  let  me  spend  the  autumn  with  you." 

"You  may,"  he  was  told. 

Thereupon  he  abode  with  them.  Now  they  killed  fish 
there  where  they  were  spending  the  autumn.  In  the 
course  of  time  (the  lake)  was  frozen  over,  so  thereupon 
there  they  spent  the  winter.  Now  they  had  some  children. 
As  time  went  on,  they  ate  up  (all)  their  fish.  Thereupon 
this  was  what  (Nanabushu)  said  to  them  with  whom  he 
lived  :  a  Now,  therefore,  we  will  eat  your  fishes  first ;  and 
then  afterwards,  when  they  are  gone,  then  our  fish  will 


we  eat." 


And  so  truly  that  was  what  they  did.  Now,  it  was 
true  that  they  ate  the  fish  of  the  others.  In  course  of 
time  they  ate  up  (all)  the  fish.  And  so  after  they  had 
eaten  up  the  fish  of  his  companions,  they  that  were  on 
the  opposite  side  of  the  (lodge)  fire,  then  gone  were  all 
the  fish  of  the  other;  thereupon  he  became  angry  at  them, 

1  For  other  versions  see  Nos.  28,  29. 

4 — PUBL.    AMER.    ETHN.    SOC.    VOL.    VII. 


50 

ka'rjikusit.  Pangi  upimayari'  kri'cikabaci,  anlc  mldac 
rrwiti  iciwinat  lni/u  uglngdn'rman.  Anlc  misa  pa'kadanit 
Ini/u  ka'kidamawat  Ini/u  uglngonimini.  Anlc  mldac  lasa'u 
inini  anica  uginln  wandcipimadcra/t  48i/u  unldcanisa8. 
5  Ningutingigu  tagwicing  'a8a/u  inini.  "  Mlmawlntcigawanan 
damang,"  ugri'nan  !ni/u  wlwan. 

aMimawmi'i-u,"  ugri'gon. 

Mldac     cigwa    mlnawa    aciwabininig    mlnawa    animadca 

nandawabamat  Ini/u  uginln.      Ningutingigu  anipimadaga'kut 

10  saga'i'ganing,  anitcatclkawat,  ningutingigu  kago  uglnondam 

madwasininig    miciwa'kung.      Ugiwabandan    a'tanig,    mldac 

ka-rcinasilkank,    kuniginln    pikwa'k !       Mldac    kanawaban- 

dank    wa-i-ci'u'da'pinank.      Kumiginm    awiya    uglmadwaga- 

nonigon :     "Tatata,"  :    ugri'gon ;    "klnina    Ii8i/u    kipigwa'k," 

15   ugri-gon. 


<O8*o'widac     ugri'nan:     "Kawm,"    ugri'nan.       "Anicagu 
nlwlwabandan." 

"Taga,   podawan  kundigu  kigfkatc,"  ugl'i'gon. 

O-o'dac     ugri-nan:      "Aye8,     kaga't    nigrkatc."       Mldac 
20  kaga't  acipodawat,   mldac  i'i'man  aci'a'wasut. 


Mldac  rrman  ajigagistcinit,  midac,  "Taga,  midcin  mi/u 
indacikanan,"  ugri-gon.  Mldac  kagat  acro'da'pinank  lni/u 
udaciganini,  anln  kawri'cinang  a'pl  ka-u'da'pinang  Ini/u 
udaciganini  minangwana  lni/u  kaskami'kwanawan  !  Pacigi- 
25  dac  udanawickwandan,  "Mlgu'i'11  ka'kina  icimld  cin," 
ugri'gon.  "Mamindaga  idac  ningri'niga'a'g,"  krrnandam  ; 
"i'i'wisa  kiskwandamawasiwagwa  ninldcanisag."  Owabaman 

1  Tatata,  "you  fool,"  an  adverb  of  imprecation. 


and  so  moved  away.  Not  far  away  he  made  his  camp, 
and  so  of  course  thither  he  took  his  own  fish.  So  thereby 
hungry  became  the  others  whose  fish  he  had  eaten  up. 
Now,  as  for  the  man  (whose  fish  had  been  eaten  up),  he 
kept  his  children  alive  by  means  of  sweet-brier  berries. 
So  once  when  home  came  the  man,  "Now,  I  fear  that 
we  shall  starve,"  he  said  to  his  wife. 

"I  fear  so,"  he  was  told. 

And  so  on  the  following  day  he  started  on  his  way 
again  to  seek  for  sweet-brier  berries.  And  once  as  he 
was  travelling  over  the  ice  of  the  lake,  as  he  went  walking 
along  the  shore-line,  he  suddenly  heard  the  sound  of 
something  out  on  the  ice.  He  saw  that  an  object  was 
there,  and  so  went  up  to  it,  and  lo,  it  was  an  arrow ! 
Accordingly  he  gazed  upon  it  with  a  desire  to  pick  it  up. 
He  was  startled  at  the  sound  of  somebody's  voice  saying 
to  him:  "You  fool,"1  he  was  told;  "is  that  your  arrow?" 
he  was  told. 

And  this  he  said  to  him:  "Nay,"  he  said  to  him.  "I 
desire  only  to  look  at  it." 

"Come,  kindle  a  fire.  It  seems  as  if  you  are  cold," 
he  was  told. 

And  this  he  said  to  him:  "Yes,  truly,  I  am  cold." 
Accordingly,  indeed,  he  kindled  a  fire,  and  so  there  he 
warmed  himself. 

And  then  the  other  took  off  his  moccasins,  whereupon, 
"Pray,  eat  these  moccasins  of  mine,"  he  was  told.  Accord 
ingly,  indeed,  he  took  the  other's  moccasins,  and  what 
was  he  to  behold  when  he  took  the  other's  moccasins 
but  really  the  dried  tails  of  beavers !  3  Now,  one  he  fully 
intended  to  leave,  but,  "All  of  it  shall  you  eat,"  he  was 
told.  "Now,  very  great  wrong  am  I  doing  them,"  he 
thought,  "in  that  I  have  not  saved  some  for  my  children." 

2  The  tail   of  a  beaver  dried  by  fire  is  a  delicacy. 


rru  iyanigu'kwanig  Ini/u  uma'kisinan,  pacigwag  ini/u  malk- 
wayanan  niganigu  ma'tcigisinit,  miwanini11  wama'kisinit ; 
iniwidac  maskitibanabin  miwamniu  pagwa'rgatanig  kisi/u 
uma'kisining.  Mldac  ka'kijibabl'tclnit  ka-i-cinasi'kaminit 
5  (isi/u  umackimut,  uglckackimut.  Mldac  ka'i'cislgwabinanit 
liei/u  udugimma8,  mldac  ka-i'cimockina'a-nit  ami'kuminan. 


Mldac  ka'i'ci'u-mbawana'i'gut.  Mldac  alpl  ka'O'mbawa- 
na'i-gut  o'o'dac  ugri'gon :  "Anipacwanbandaman  iima 
andayag  unabandan  ki^ciwanu'kamigag,  mldac  i'i'ma11 

10  ka-rcipagatciwapa'kandaman  (isi/u  kimackimut.  Mldac  kanl- 
cimadcayan,  kagu7  win  abanabi'kan.  Pamadac  kigicap 
klgapi'i'nap.  Ayangwamisin ;  kici'kan  o'crma11  tcimadcayan ; 
awiya  kiganondawag  'i*i/u  tcisa'kwanikwa,  o'o'dac  kiga'i'- 
gog :  l  'A8a/u,  kungwau'k!'  klga'i'gog.  Gagu^ac  abanabi- 

15  lkan ;  ayangwamisin.  Migu-i'u  icictcigan  rrwisa  aciki'ki- 
no'a'monan." 


8 


Mldac  kaga't  ka'i'cimadciba'tot.  O'o'widac  ugri'go 
(i2i'u  paminica'u'gut:  utA8a/u,  kungwa'u^k  !"  ugri'go9.  Midac 
kaga't  pacu'tawat;  intigwamlpigu  katabibiciwat.  Anlc 
20  saga'i'ganing  pimadaga'kuba  'i'wat.  Midac  cayigwa  anawi 
pacwabandank  'i8i/u  tcimicaga'kuba'i-wat,  midac  a'pitci 
cigwa  kzTkrrgut  48i/u  paminica'u-gut.  Midac  cigwa  miga- 
ga'kuba'i'wat;  kamicaga'kut,  awaniban  48i/u  paminica-u'gut.1 

1  That  is,  the  manitous  of  the  wind. 


53 

He  saw  how  large  the  moccasins  were,  that  one  bear 
skin  was  of  a  bear  surpassingly  large,  and  from  that  the 
other  had  a  moccasin ;  and  (the  skin  of)  a  young  bear 
was  what  he  used  for  a  patch  on  his  moccasins.  And 
when  the  other  had  put  on  his  moccasins,  he  went  to 
where  his  bag  was,  his  cedar-bark  bag.  And  so  when 
he  poured  out  his  sweet-brier  berries,  he  filled  the  bag 
up  with  beaver  berries. 

Thereupon  by  the  other  was  he  helped  in  lifting  the 
pack  upon  his  back.  And  then,  after  he  had  helped  in 
lifting  on  the  pack,  this  he  was  told:  "When  you  have 
come  nigh  to  the  place  where  you  (and  the  others)  live, 
then  select  a  large  hollow  space  of  ground,  and  there  is 
where  you  should  put  down  that  pack  of  yours.  And 
then  you  should  continue  on  your  way,  and  look  not  back 
behind  you.  Not  till  in  the  morning  should  you  go  and 
look.  Exert  yourself;  make  haste  as  you  go  on  this  path ; 
for  the  sound  of  somebody  will  you  hear  yelling  at  you, 
and  this  you  will  be  told:  'Hey,  push  him!'  will  you  be 
told.  So  look  not  back ;  be  careful.  Do  precisely  as  I 
have  taught  you." 

And  so  truly  off  he  started  running.  And  this  he  was 
told  by  them  who  pursued  him:  "Hey,  push  him!"  he 
was  told.  And  now,  indeed,  he  heard  them  a  short  distance 
away ;  it  seemed  that  now  they  would  overtake  him.  So 
out  upon  the  ice  of  a  lake  he  came  fleeing.  And  not 
withstanding  that,  already  was  he  coming  close  to  the 
other  side  in  his  flight  over  the  ice,  yet  exceedingly  hard 
was  he  now  being  pressed  by  them  who  were  pursuing 
him.  And  then  presently  was  he  arriving  at  the  other 
side  of  the  frozen  lake ;  and  when  he  was  come  at  the 
other  side  of  the  ice,  gone  were  they  by  whom  he  was 
pursued.1 


54 

Mlsa  pisan  anrijipapimusat.  Mldac  cisi/u  ka'rgut:  "Anlc 
kawln  gayapi  iwati  no'piming  kanibiminija'irgusV  ugrrgon. 
Mldac  kaga't  kawln  keyabi  ugra^nra-manisutuwasln  iwiti 
kani'kuplt.  Mldac  kaga't  kra-nra-ntawabandank  rrman 
5  tcigistclwana'kamiganig.  Mldac  kaga't  aciwabandank  rrman 
ki'tciwana'kamiganig,  mldac  i'i-ma11  ka'ijipagitciwapa'kan- 
dank.  Mlsa  kaga't  kawln  kra'banabisi.  Mlsa  kaniijikiwat. 
O'o-widac  ugri'gon  !ni/u  wlwan  :  "Anm  wlna  kipmasiwadwa 
Igi/u  uginlg?"  ugi'i'gon  Ini/u  wlwan. 


10  O'o'dac  ugri'nan :  "An'ic,  kawm  ningutino  kita'i'nan- 
danzl,  kanabatc  kicawandagus,"  1  ugrrnan  mi/u  wiwan. 
Mldac  kawin  kicancax  nibasi  'asa/u  inini.  "Wo'o-  kuca7 
ningl'i'ciwabis ;  kanabatc,  mindimoya,  klcawandagusimin," 
ugrrnan  Ini/u  wiwan.  Mldac  a'pl  kawabaninig  acikanonat: 

15    "'A'au',   amba,  icada6!" 

Mldac  kaga't  cigwa  kra'nimadcawat,  awrrnabiwat  i'i'ma11 
kl'pipagitciwapa'kandank  48i/u  omockimut ;  amm  ka-i'cina- 
mowat  alpi  anitababandamuwat  a'pana  mlgu'i'11  namawan ! 
Mldac  motcigisiwat.  "Kaga'tiguna  klgawlsinimin."  Mlsa 
20  cigwa  alp!  ka'u'ntciwanawat.  Mlsa  ka/rnano'klwat,  klci- 
gatnig  kaya  kra'wanawat  Ini/u  namawan.  Mldac  a'pl  cigwa 
ka'a'wanawat  kawin  gayapi  klwlsinislwag. 


"Taga,   uwraakamawi'k  i-i'man  kitonda'i'baninang." 
Mldac    kaga't   ka'rca'kamawawat.      Anlc  potc  taplndiga 

i  Kicawandagus,    "you    (will)    yet    have    food    to    eat;"    literally,    "you    will   be 


55 

And  so  in  peace  he  then  went  walking  on.  Now,  this 
was  what  he  had  been  told  :  "  For  at  yonder  forest  will 
you  no  longer  be  pursued,"  he  was  told.  It  was  true 
that  no  longer  did  he  feel  the  pursuit  of  anybody  after 
he  had  gone  up  from  the  shore.  And  so  truly  he  con 
tinued  his  way,  looking  for  the  place  where  there  was  a 
great  depression  in  the  ground.  And  when  he  truly  saw 
the  place  that  had  a  deep  depression,  it  was  there  that 
he  dropped  his  pack.  It  was  true  that  he  did  not  look 
back.  And  so  on  his  way  back  home  he  went.  Now, 
this  he  was  asked  by  his  wife :  "  Where  are  the  sweet- 
brier  berries  that  you  went  to  get?"  he  was  asked  by 
his  wife. 

And  this  he  said  to  her:  "Why,  in  no  wise  should  you 
feel  so  sad  about  it,  for  no  doubt  you  will  yet  have  food 
to  eat,"  1  he  said  to  his  wife.  And  then  hardly  could  the 
man  sleep.  "This  is  indeed  the  feeling  I  have  had,  that 
perhaps,  old  woman,  we  shall  yet  be  blessed,"  he  (thus) 
said  to  his  wife.  And  so  after  the  day  was  come,  he 
then  addressed  her,  saying:  "All  right,  come,  let  us  go!" 

Thereupon,  in  truth,  they  now  started  on  their  way,  they 
went  to  look  at  the  place  where  he  had  dropped  his  pack 
when  coming  home ;  now,  what  were  they  to  behold  when 
they  caught  sight  of  it  but  a  place  full  of  sturgeons ! 
Thereupon  were  they  happy.  "Without  fail  shall  we  now 
have  food  to  eat."  And  so  from  that  moment  they  began 
packing  from  there.  And  now  when  they  set  to  work, 
while  it  was  day  and  all  day  long,  they  packed  (and) 
hauled  the  sturgeon.  And  so  by  the  time  they  had  finished 
hauling  it  all,  not  yet  had  they  eaten. 

"I  say,  do  you  go  wait  for  him  at  the  place  where  we 
draw  our  water." 

Accordingly  they  truly  waited  for  him.     Naturally  without 

blessed,"    but  blessed  in  a  particular  way,  which  in  this  case  is  in  the  getting  of  food. 


56 

Ia8a/u    Nanabucu ;    cigwa    ka'klcf  tawat,    pacik  kaya  rrman 
utackwandamiwan      uglpima'kwicimawat      Ini/u      namawan. 
..  Anlc  mii/u  pra-wat  tciblndiganit  Ini/u  Nanabucowan. 

Midac    kaga't    asawati    Nanabucu    o8'd'   utigo8 :    "Nimba- 
5   'kinagunanig  Igi/u  kwlwisansag,"  l  ugri'gd8  Ii8i/u  unidcanisa8 
'a8a/u  Nanabucu,   o8o7   ugl'i'go  is-i/>u  unidcanisa8. 

Od'widac  kri-'kito  :  "Magica  kago  uglmi'kani  48i/u  midac 
wantcimino'a-yawat.  Kaga't  kuca  aya'a'n  namawa'kwan, 
mlguca  48i/u  madciwat.  Midac  wandcipa'kinawiyangitwa. 

10  Taga  ningawabama  mtcizazi'kizi,"  !  ugri'nan  48i/u  unidca 
nisa8.  Midac  kaga't  cigwa  klmadcat  mawatisat  Ini/u  Papa- 
'klwisan.3  Midac  ka/i'cipmdigawat,  mlgu  -i'man  anipmdigat, 
owabaman  namawan  pima'kwucinini !  Wo'o'widac  ugri'nan: 
"  Ningamawadisa  nitcizazrkizl,"  ugri'nan.  Anm  ka*i'cina- 

15  mawat  48i/u  andanit  atata  oba'ta*rnawan  namawan  !  Wo'o1- 
widac  uoq-rnan :  "Anlndi  wantcinanatwa?" 

o  •       • 


Midac  ka'i'gut :  "Ocrma11  nintonta'i'paninang.  Wo'o'- 
kri-cictciga  lasa/u  nimmdimoyayim ;  kra-pi'ka  kabagijik. 
Midac  ka'ijisagisitayabinikacit,  midac  i'i-man  nintonta'i-pa- 

20  ninang  ka'i'cipa'kuplyan.  Midac  a'pl  rrwiti  wabamak 
agumut,  midac  pacipawak.  Midac  acito'tokablkibitoyan, 
midac  aciwl'kubitot  'a8a/u  mindimoyan.  Midac  aci'a'gwawa- 
binit.  Mldacigu  mlnawa  acipa'kublyan.  Nax,  misa'  acic- 
tcigayan  i'i'ma11  ka-u'ntinaman.  Midac  kaya  nln  wantciwl- 

25   siniyan.      Mlsa'i>u  windamonan  ka'i-cictcigayan." 

1  Referring  to  the  contest  between  the  children  of  Nanabushu  and  those  of  the 
other  family. 

'2  Nitcizaz^kizi,   "my  old  friend:"   literally,   "my  one  of  the  same   age  as  I." 

3  Papa'klwisan,    "Pilferer;"   in  the  nominative  form  it  is  Papackiwis;   this  is  the 

Papakeewis,    the    mischief-maker,  in  the  song  of  Hiawatha.     The  name   comes  from 

pa^kwis,    one  that  breaks  off  or  snaps  something  off;   the  reduplicated  form  denotes 

the  frequency  of  the  act;  and  the  name  connotes  one  given  to  petty  theft,  especially 


57 

fail  would  Nanabushu  come  in  ;  so,  after  they  were  ready, 
then  one  of  the  sturgeons  they  laid  across  their  doorway. 
Then  accordingly  waited  they  for  Nanabushu  to  come  in. 

Thereupon,  truly,  Nanabushu  at  yonder  place  had  this 
told  him:  "We  lost  to  the  boys  in  a  wager,"  l  (thus)  by 
his  children  was  Nanabushu  told,  this  was  he  told  by  his 
children. 

So  this  he  said:  "Probably  he  has  found  something, 
and  for  that  reason  they  are  living  comfortably.  Surely, 
indeed,  it  is  sturgeon-roe,  for  that  was  what  they  ate. 
It  was  on  that  account  that  they  won  from  us.  I  think 
I  will  go  and  see  my  old  friend,"  2  he  said  to  his  children. 
Thereupon,  truly,  he  soon  was  off  to  visit  the  Pilferer.3 
And  so  after  he  had  gone  in,  indeed  while  he  was  entering, 
he  saw  a  sturgeon  lying  across  his  way !  And  this  he 
said  to  them:  "I  want  to  visit  my  old  friend,"  he  said  to 
them.  What  should  he  see  where  the  others  lived  but  a 
wonderful  supply  of  sturgeon !  And  this  he  said  to  them  : 
"Where  did  you  kill  them?"  he  said  to  him. 

So  this  he  was  told:  "Over  here  at  our  water-hole. 
This  my  old  woman  did ;  she  was  at  work  all  day  long 
making  a  line.  And  after  she  had  tied  the  line  to  my 
foot,  I  thereupon  went  down  into  the  water  by  way  of 
our  water-hole.  And  when  I  saw  (the  sturgeon)  down 
there  under  the  water,  I  then  speared  it.  And  when  I 
jerked  the  line,  then  on  the  line  pulled  the  old  woman. 
So  thus  she  drew  me  out  of  the  water.  And  so  once 
again  I  went  down  into  the  water.  There,  that  was  how 
I  did  down  there  where  I  got  them.  Now,  that  was  how 
I  provided  myself  with  food.  Therefore  have  I  related 
to  you  what  I  had  done." 

in  the  way  of  food.  The  term  is  also  a  synonyme  for  a  "sponger  5"  the  phrase 
ubaba'kiwisi'kanan  means,  "he  desires  the  use  of  some  one  else's  things  before  using 
his  own," 


58 

"Kaga'tsa,"  krr'kito  casa/u  Nanabucu.  "Mlsa7  idac 
isi/u  Izan  rrman  ka-irntciwlsiniyan." 

Anlc  acama  rrman  mawaticiwat.  Wo'O'tac  krrna: 
Igiwati  kitani'a-yawag  nintickwantaminang  kapima'kwici- 


nuwat." 


Mldac  kaga't  kanicisaga'a'nk,  kra'ni'u'da'pinat  48i/u  na- 
mawas,  mldac  kamciklwat,  O'O'dac  ogri'nan  ini/u  wiwan  : 
"Taga,  wabank  api'ka'kan.  Miguca  Isan  i-i'man  utagaml- 
miwang  wantcinanawa  Ini/u  namawan." 

10  Mldac  kaga't  ka'i'cictcigat  'a8a/u  mindimoya,  ki'a-pi'kat 
kabagljik,  wmidac  'a8a/u  Nanabucu  kra'nitrka.  Mldac 
ka'i-jikici'tawat,  wayabaninig  kigicap  o'o'widac  ugrrgon 
Ini/u  Papa'kiwisan  :  "Migu  -i'man  nmtonta'i'baninang  icipa- 
'kubln."  Wo'o'widac  kl'i'cictciga  Ia8a/u  Papa'kiwis,  ugra'- 

15   gumu'a-an  Ini/u  namawan. 

Mldac  a'pipa'kublt  Nanabucu  kaya  ani'a'I'nabit  uglwa- 
baman,  kaga't  agumunit  ini/u  namawan.  Anlc  misa"  aci- 
pacipawat.  Acito'togabigipitot,  mldac  ka'i'ci'a'gwawabi- 
nigut  Ini/u  wiwan.  Kuniginln  kaga't  namawan  utagwaci- 
20  manini.  Wo'o'widac  udinan  Ini/u  wiwan:  "Mlnangwana 
wo'o-ma  ka/u'ndatismg." 


Anlc,  mlnawa  anu'i'cipa'kubit,  anubaba'i'nabit,  misa7 
kawin  ganaga  ningutino  icinanzl ;  plnicigu  a'kwanabawat, 
intawa  a'kwanabawat  ajito'togablgipitot.  Anlc,  minawagu 
25  anuba'kubl;  mldac  intawa  ka'rcito'tokabigipi'tot.  Ka'i'ci- 
•a'gwawabinigut  Ini/u  wiwan,  anic,  minawagu  anuba'kubl, 
misa  kawin  kanaga  kago.  "Anm  aciwabisiwangan  i'i'wisa 


59 

"Yes,  indeed,"  said  Nanabushu.  "Possibly  that  may 
be  a  source  by  which  I  shall  obtain  some  food." 

Naturally  he  was  fed  at  the  place  where  he  was  visiting. 
Now,  this  he  was  told:  "Take  with  you  the  ones  that  lie 
across  yonder  doorway  of  ours." 

It  was  so  that,  as  he  went  out,  he  took  up  the  sturgeons, 
and  then  he  went  his  homeward  way.  Now,  this  he  said 
to  his  wife:  "I  say,  to-morrow  do  you  make  a  line.  For 
it  was  by  way  of  yonder  water-hole  of  theirs  that  they 
killed  the  sturgeons." 

Accordingly  that  truly  was  what  the  old  woman  did: 
she  worked  all  day  long  making  a  line,  while  Nanabushu 
himself  worked  at  making  spears.  And  so  after  they  were 
ready,  then  on  the  morning  of  the  morrow  this  he  was 
told  by  the  Pilferer:  "By  way  of  yonder  water-hole  of  ours 
do  you  go  into  the  water."  Now,  this  had  the  Pilferer 
done,  he  had  laid  a  sturgeon  in  under  the  water. 

And  so  when  into  the  water  Nanabushu  went,  and  when 
he  was  looking  about,  he  saw,  sure  enough,  a  sturgeon 
moving  in  the  water.  So  thereupon  he  speared  it.  When 
he  jerked  the  line,  he  was  then  pulled  out  of  the  water 
by  his  wife.  She  was  amazed  to  see  him  actually  drawing 
a  sturgeon  out  of  the  water.  And  this  he  said  to  his 
wife :  "This  is  just  the  place  where  we  shall  obtain 


sustenance." 


Well,  again  he  went  into  the  water,  but  without  success; 
in  vain  he  tried  looking  about,  but  not  a  single  thing 
did  he  see ;  (this  continued)  till  he  was  getting  short  of 
breath,  and  there  was  no  need  of  his  getting  out  of  breath. 
Then  he  jerked  the  line  (to  be  drawn  up).  So  once  more 
he  went  into  the  water,  but  it  came  to  nothing ;  and  so 
without  success  he  jerked  on  the  line  (to  be  drawn  up). 
After  he  was  pulled  out  of  the  water  by  his  wife,  why, 
he  would  have  gone  back  in  again,  but  it  was  no  use 


6o 

wabamasiwag  'aV11  nama?"  ugrrnan  Ini/u  wlwan.  Intawa 
ka'katabawat,  intawamrr11  ka/rcra-nici'tank.  Kaga/t  inanga 
rrman  krirndinigasuwan ;  anica  kra'gantcitcigasuwan. 
Mldac  ka/rciklwawat  intawa.  Kumadac  igu  a'pl'a'i'ndawad 
5  anlc  ml  cigwa  pa'katawad. 


Cigwa    anawi    sigwanini,    mldac    wmi'tam  ka'i'cinantawi- 

ginlwat.      A'pidci    tacigu    pa'kadawat,    animadcat ;    uginln 

ugiwabaman,    anlc    miya'tagu    'i'i'u    wantcipimatciat  umtca- 

nisan.      Mldac  anandank :    "Kuniga  ningapina  'asa/u  ugin?" 

10  inandam. 


Ningutingigu  anibabimusat  saga'i'gan  ogiwabandan ; 
anlcimada'kut,  anlcitcatclgawat  'i'i'u  saga'i'gan.  Owaban- 
dan  wapigamanig.  Pama  mlgu  rrman  saga'i'ganing  na- 
wi'kwam  kago  madwasininig.  Aji'i'nabit,  mldac  kaga't 
15  ka/rcinondank  madwasininig.  "Wagunan?"  kri'nandam. 
Kuniginln,  aninasikank  pikwa'k  kl'a-'tani  kitcipikwa'k, 
ma'kwa'tawagan  asawawint !  Acrirta'pinank  awiya  ma- 
dwaganonigon :  "Tatata,  klnina  kibikwa'k,  Nanabucu, 
wa-u'da'pinaman  ?" 


20        "Aye8,   nislmisa,   nin  nimbikwa'k." 

"Kawln,   nm,   Nanabucu,   nimbikwa'k,"   ugrrgon. 
"Kawln,"  ugri-nan   casa/u  Nanabucu. 

"Kawln,"     ugri-gon;     "Nm    48i/u    nimbikwa'k."       Medac 
ka'i'gut:  "Kawln  win  kri'kitusl  Papa'kiwis  a'pl  cawanimag." 

25        "On,"    ugri-nan    wa'a'u    Nanabucu;    "kin    nangwana    'iu, 
niclmisa,  kipi'kwa'k!"  ugri'nan. 


6i 

at  all.  "What  can  be  the  matter  with  us  that  I  do  not 
see  any  sturgeon?"  he  said  to  his  wife.  For  nought  was 
he  chilled  by  the  water,  so  he  gave  up  in  failure.  It  truly 
was  not  a  place  to  get  (sturgeons) ;  for  wittingly  had  (the 
sturgeon)  been  put  into  the  water  for  him.  Thereupon 
back  home  they  went  without  success.  And  so  later  on, 
while  they  were  abiding  there,  they  then  began  to  be  in 
want  of  food. 

It  was  now  getting  well  on  towards  the  springtime, 
whereupon  he  took  it  upon  himself  to  go  looking  for 
sweet-brier  berries.  So  when  they  were  exceedingly  hungry, 
he  started  on  his  way  -,  some  sweet-brier  berries  he  found, 
for  it  was  only  by  such  means  that  he  was  able  to  keep 
his  children  alive.  And  then  he  thought :  "  Wonder  if  I 
can  take  the  sweet-brier  berries  home !"  he  thought. 

Now,  once  as  he  was  walking  along,  he  saw  a  lake ; 
then  along  upon  the  ice  he  went,  on  the  ice  along  by  the 
edge  of  the  lake  he  travelled.  He  saw  where  (the  lake) 
narrowed  into  a  channel.  Then  farther  on  the  lake,  far  out 
upon  the  ice,  he  heard  some  sort  of  a  sound.  As  he  looked, 
then  was  he  sure  that  he  heard  something  making  a  sound. 
"What  (is  it)?"  he  thought.  As  he  went  up  to  it,  there 
was  an  arrow,  a  great  arrow,  with  the  ear  of  a  bear  for 
the  feather !  As  he  reached  for  it,  he  heard  the  voice  of 
some  one  addressing  him:  "Fool,  is  it  your  arrow,  Nana- 
bushu,  that  you  should  have  the  desire  to  take  it?" 

"Yea,   my  younger  brother,  it  is  my  own  arrow." 

"Nay,  it  is  mine,  Nanabushu,  it  is  my  arrow,"  he  was  told. 

"Nay,"  to  him  said  Nanabushu. 

"Nay,"  he  was  told,  "it  is  my  own  arrow."  And  he  was 
told:  "The  Pilferer  himself  did  not  say  that  when  I  was 
merciful  to  him." 

"Oh,"  to  him  said  Nanabushu,  "then  it  is  the  truth,  my 
younger  brother,  that  the  arrow  is  yours!"  he  said  to  him. 


62 

Cigwa      minawa     uglkanonigon      Nanabucu:      "Intigwa 
kigrkatc.     Taga,   potawan,"  ugrrgon. 

Oo-dac  kri-'kito  wa-a'u  Nanabucu:  "Antagasa  'asa/u  mini 
klgrkatci.      Kawm    nm    nimkfkatisi,"    krr'kito    lasa/u    Na- 
5   nabucu. 

"  Nanabucu,     kawm     kri^kitusl     a'pi     cawanimag     laca/u 
Papa'kwis." 

"Ayes,   niclmisa,   kaga't  ningl'katc." 

"Potawin  guta." 

10  Kaga't  ka'i'cipotawat.  Mri'dac  mri'ma11  ka-i'cigagi'tcinit. 
"Taga,  Nanabucu,  midcin  uno/u  nindaciganan." 

Wo'5'widac  ugri'nan:   "Kawm  nin  nindanimuciwisl  kami- 
tciyamban  lni/u  aciganan." 

"Nanabucu,  kawin  kri''kitus!  Papa'kiwis  alpl  cawanimag." 

15  "Aye8,  niclmisa,  kaga't  ningamitcinan  Ini/u  kitaciganan." 
Mldac  ka'i'cipa'pa'u'wabinaminit  mldac  ka'i^kitut  au  Nana 
bucu  :  "Pldon,  niclmisa,  ningamldcinan  Ini/u  kitaciganan." 
Amn  ka'i'cinang  Nanabucu,  kuniginln,  Ini/u  kaskami'kwa- 
nuwan !  Mldac  kagat,  acimldcit.  Pajig  utanawl'i'ckwandan. 

20  "Awawa,  Nanabucu,  mlgu'ru  icigitan."  Mldac  kaga/t 
ka'i'cigitang. 


Cigwa  undani-u'da'pinamini  48i/u  utogimwac,  acisigwapi- 
nanit  4i8i/u  udogimma8.  Aninimina'kuwan  micawi'kwam 
kidacisigwa-i'gawan.  Mldac  ka-ijimockina-a/nit  i'i'ma11 

25  mackimutank,  "Amba,  Nanabucu,"  ugri'gon.  "Umpum 
wasau  mi'kwam.  Kagu  win  inanimicikan.  'Acimadci  nin- 
grrniga'i'k!'  inantangan.  Kmlgu  kigababami'tam  48i/u 
a/rninan.  Ayangwamisin ;  ambasano,  manu  icitcigan  ka'i'- 
ninan.  Kagu'  bablni'tawici'kan ;  mlgu  iu  tci-i*niga-i'tisuyan 

30  klcpin    pablni'tawiyan    lisi/u ;   mlgu  iu  kaga't  tci'i'niga'toyan 


63 

Presently  again  was  Nanabushu  addressed:  "It  seems 
as  if  you  were  cold.  Pray,  kindle  a  fire,"  he  was  told. 

And  this  said  Nanabushu  :  "  He  is  surely  the  man  who 
is  cold.  I  am  not  cold,"  said  Nanabushu. 

"Nanabushu,  the  Pilferer  did  not  say  that  when  I  was 
blessing  him." 

"Yea,  my  younger  brother,  certainly  I  am  cold." 

"Then  build  you  up  a  fire." 

Truly,  after  that  he  built  up  a  fire.  Accordingly  the 
other  then  took  off  his  moccasins  there.  "I  say,  Nana 
bushu,  eat  these  stockings  of  mine." 

And  this  he  said  to  him  :  "I  am  not  a  dog,  that  I  should 
eat  those  stockings." 

"Nanabushu,  the  Pilferer  did  not  say  that  when  I  was 
taking  pity  upon  him." 

"  Yea,  my  younger  brother,  truly,  will  I  eat  those  stockings 
of  yours."  And  so,  after  the  other  had  shaken  them  thor 
oughly,  then  this  said  Nanabushu:  "Bring  them  hither, 
my  younger  brother,  I  will  eat  those  stockings  of  yours." 
What  was  Nanabushu  to  behold  but  a  wondrous  store  of 
dried  beaver-tails !  Thereupon  truly  he  ate.  One  he 
wished  to  save.  "O  Nanabushu!  go  eat  it  up."  Where 
upon  truly  he  ate  it  up. 

When  the  other  went  and  took  up  (Nanabushu's)  bag 
of  sweet-brier  berries,  he  emptied  out  his  sweet-brier  berries. 
Then  off  he  went,  going  far  out  upon  the  ice,  where  he 
began  chopping  the  ice  (into  chunks).  And  then,  after 
he  had  filled  the  sack  full  (of  ice),  "Hither,  Nanabushu," 
(Nanabushu)  was  told.  "Carry  this  ice  upon  your  back. 
Regard  me  not  in  an  evil  way.  lOh,  the  evil  that  I  am 
done!'  do  not  think.  (It  is  for)  your  (good)  that  you 
should  heed  what  I  am  telling  you.  Be  careful ;  I  beg 
of  you,  try  to  do  what  I  tell  you.  Do  not  disobey  me  ; 


64 

klya/u.  Ambasano,  ayangwamisin,  icictcigan  'i8i/u  ka/rninan. 
Q-o-man  tcra-nimadcayan,  awlya  kikanontawag  tcigagigito- 
wat.  'A-e'e1!'  klga'i'gdg  awlya.  Kagu  pabami'tawa'kan. 
1  'A'a/u,  Nanabushu,  pamataga'kut !'  klga'i'gog.  l  'Ala/u, 
5  kungwa'u-'k !'  klga-i'gog.  Kagux  abanabi'kan.  Mlgu  48i/u 
a'pana  ka-i'ni'taman  WCTO*  saga'i'gan  tcibimataga'kuyan. 
Pimiba'ton  anigu'k.  Midac  ka'i'ni'kwa :  c  1O,  lo,  co,  lo, 
kungwa'u-'k,  kungwa'u-'k,  kungwa*u'(k!'  klga'i'gog." 


Midac    a'pl  cigwa  ki'pimadca ;   pitcmagigu   a'pi  patagwi- 
10  cing,     cigwa    kaga't    awiya    onondawa8.      Midac    acimadcl- 
pa'tod,    cigwa    gaga't  onondawa8,    "  1AU,   lau,   'au,   lau,   kun- 
gwa-u''k  Nanabucu  !"  utigo8. 

'An,  midac  kaga't  nandaganimusig  pimipa'tod.  Cayigwa 
nawi'kwam  pimadaga'kuba'to.  Kumagu  udaplsi'taw^a8  48i/u 
15  paminlca-irgut.  Midac  aninantaganimusig  ackam  pacu. 
Ningutingigu,  "Mlmawln  tcitabibiciwat  ka/rnwawat,"  kri  n- 
andam.  Ugltcicagwasum  'rru  waga'kwat ;  aciyabamipagisut, 
"  'Au,  kungwa'u-'k !"  kri-'kitu.  Anu'i'nabit,  kawln  awlya 
oglwabamasin. 


20  Midac  mmawa  acimadciba'tod,  misa  unbtcita  48i/u  ani'tank; 
anigu'k  pimiba'to.  "Taga  nlngagwanaganag  Igi/u  ka'i'n- 
wawat,"  kri-nandam.  Midac  anigu'k  anupimipa'tod  acka- 
migu  upacu'tawa  mmawa.  "Mlmawln  midac  i'i<u  tcitabi 
biciwat  Igi/u  ka-i-nwawat,"  kri-nandam.  Midac  a'pidci 


65 

else  you  will  surely  clo  yourself  harm  if  you  fail  to  obey 
me  in  that ;  for  truly  will  you  do  yourself  harm.  I  beg 
of  you,  be  careful,  do  that  which  I  have  told  you.  When 
from  this  place  you  start  upon  your  way,  you  will  hear 
the  voice  of  somebody  talking".  'Halloo  !'  you  will  be  told 
by  somebody.  Do  not  heed  them.  'Halloo,  Nanabushu 
is  passing  across  on  the  ice!'  they  will  say  of  you.  Now, 
then,  'Push  him!'  they  will  say  of  you.  Don't  look  back. 
That  is  what  you  will  keep  hearing  all  the  while  you  are 
crossing  this  lake  on  the  ice.  Run  as  fast  as  you  can. 
This  is  what  they  will  say  to  you  :  'Hey,  hey,  hey,  hey, 
push  him,  push  him,  push  him!'  they  will  say  of  you." 

And  so  then  was  when  he  came  starting  away.  As  soon 
as  he  was  come  at  the  place,  then  truly  some  one  he 
heard.  And  as  he  began  running,  then  truly  he  heard 
them,  "Hey,  hey,  hey,  hey,  push  Nanabushu !"  was  said 
of  him. 

Ah,  thereupon  truly,  nothing  loath,  he  ran  with  all  his 
speed.  Soon  a  long  way  out  upon  the  ice  did  he  come 
running.  Some  distance  away  he  could  hear  those  who 
were  pursuing  him.  And  then  all  the  faster  he  went,  the 
nearer  they  came.  At  times,  "Now  they  sound  as  if  they 
will  overtake  me,"  he  thought.  From  the  belt  round  his 
waist  he  pulled  forth  an  axe.  As  round  he  whirled,  "All 
right,  push  him !"  he  said.  In  vain  he  looked  round  about, 
but  nobody  did  he  see. 

Thereupon,  as  he  started  running  again,  it  seemed  as 
if  he  could  hear  the  sound ;  with  all  his  speed  he  ran. 
"Now,  I  will  try  running  away  from  them  who  are  making 
the  noise,"  he  thought.  Thereupon  with  all  his  might  he 
tried  to  run,  and  closer  still  he  could  hear  them  again. 
"I  fear  that  they  who  are  making  the  noise  will  now 
overtake  me,"  he  thought.  Thereupon  ever  so  close  was 
he  now  being  pressed  when  again  round  he  whirled,  and 

5  — I'U1>L.    AMER.    ETHN.    SOC.    VOL.    VII. 


66 

kaya'kri'gut   mlnawa  acra/bamipagisiit,  awanan  dac  kawa- 
bamat?     Amc  anirrnabi,   awanan  dac  kawabamat? 

Mlnawa  acimadclba'tod ;  kumagu  a1  pi  mlnawa  anitagwi- 
cink,  cigwa  mlnawa  onontawa,  mldac  acimadclpa'tod  anigu'k. 
5  Mldac  anawi  cigwa  pacwabandank  i'i'man  wa'i'cimlcaga'k- 
upa'tod,  mldac  anawi  caylgwa  pacwabandank,  micigwa 
mlnawa  ka'kri'gut.  Medac  aciku'plpa'tod,  mldac  awaniban 
lisi/u  nondawa'pan. 


Mldac    acipapimusat    plsan.      Cayigwa    bacwandank  lici/u 

10  andawat,    anic    idac   cigwa  andawabandan   Ii8i/u  tciwana'ka- 

miganig ;    mldac    kaga't   cigwa  klwabandank  kiltciwanalka- 

miganig.      Mldac    iman  ka'i'cipagitciwanat.      Mldac  ka'a*ni- 

cimadcat      ki'i'na :      "Kagu7     abanabi'kan,"     anic     krrna. 

Mldac  ka-i'ci'a-banabit.      Anln  ka-rcinank  a'pi  ayabanabit? 

15    A'panagu    namawan    owabaman    iman    ka-i'cipagitciwanat. 

Kaga't  minwantam  rrman  ka'i-cipagitciwanat.      Mldac  ani- 

•i'ciglwat ;  ka'i'citagwicink  iwiti  antawat,  mldac  ka'i'gut  ini/u 

wlwan  :    "Anln  win  klblnasiwatwa  Igi/u  uginlg?" 


"Mindimonya,  ninglcawantagus."    Mlsa"  kawln  nibasl  'ifii/u 

20  tibi'katinik,    a'pltciminwantank.       Wo'O'dac    ugri-gon    Ini/u 

wlwan:     "Intacka    kigibwabablnitanzimitug    i'i'u    anugri'go- 


wanan." 


Amc  anotantam  tcibwawabaninig.      Tcigwasa  piwabanini. 
"  cAa/u,    mindimoya,    kidapi'kan    uda'pinan.     Kagackaginm 
25   na*a*gatc  ningrijinanzl,"  ugrrnan  Ini/u  wlwan. 

Mldac  kaga't  anicimadcawat.  Anisagatciwat,  awaniban 
ml'i11  kaicinank;  intacka  uglwabaman  mockinanit  lni/u 
nawawan  rrma11  kanibagitciwanat.  Mldac  aciganonat  Ini/u 


67 

who  was  there  for  him  to  see?  Even  though  he  tried 
looking  round  about,  yet  who  was  there  for  him  to  see? 

Then  again  he  started  running ;  and  when  a  certain 
distance  on  the  way  he  was  come,  then  again  he  heard 
them,  whereupon  he  began  running  with  full  speed.  And 
though  he  could  see  that  near  was  the  other  shore  which 
he  hoped  to  reach  by  running  on  the  ice,  though  he  could 
see  it  close  by,  yet  again  was  he  being  hard  pressed. 
And  when  up  from  the  shore  he  ran,  no  one  then  did 
he  hear  any  more. 

Thereupon  he  walked  peacefully  on  his  way.  When  he 
perceived  that  he  was  approaching  home,  he  then  sought 
for  a  great  depression  in  the  ground.  It  was  true  that 
soon  he  saw  where  there  was  a  great  hollow.  It  was 
there  he  put  down  his  pack.  Now,  when  he  started  to 
go,  he  was  told:  "Look  not  back,"  thus  he  was  told. 
But  what  he  did  was  to  look  back.  What  was  he  to 
behold  when  he  looked  back?  A  host  of  sturgeons  he 
saw  where  he  had  put  down  his  pack.  Truly,  was  he 
pleased  to  have  put  down  his  pack  there.  Thereupon 
he  started  on  his  homeward  way.  After  he  was  come  there 
where  they  lived,  he  was  then  asked  by  his  wife:  "Why 
did  you  not  bring  home  the  sweet-brier  berries?" 

"Old  woman,  I  have  been  blessed."  Thereupon  he  did 
not  sleep  during  the  night,  for  he  was  so  thoroughly  happy. 
And  this  he  avas  told  by  his  wife :  "  I  wager  that  you 
failed  to  obey  what  was  fruitlessly  said  to  you." 

Now,  he  longed  for  the  morning  before  it  was  time  to 
appear.  Soon  then  came  the  morning.  "Now,  then,  old 
woman,  get  your  tump-line.  By  no  means  a  mere  morsel 
have  I  seen,"  he  said  to  his  wife. 

Thereupon  truly  on  their  way  they  started.  When  he 
came  out  upon  the  hill,  gone  was  that  which  he  had  seen; 
for  previously  he  had  seen  great  abundance  of  sturgeons 


68 

umindimo-i-mican  :  "Mockinabanik  ogou  namawag."  Mldac 
ka/rgut  Ini/u  wlwan:  "Intacka  kiglbwabablnitazlmitug," 
ugri'gon  Ini/u  wlwan. 

"Ayes,"    ugrrnan;    "kaga't   'kagu  abanabi'kan,'   nintanu- 

v}          ^S  £> 

Mldac  kfrrcinickiat  lni/u  wlwan.  "Mamindagasa  gaga't 
kawln  kini'tanontanzl  k*ago  anugri-goyanin." 

Wo-o'widac  igri'nan  wasa/u  Nanabucu:  "Kaga'tsa  kawln 
ningri'jitcigasi  i'i<u  anugri'goyan."  Mldac  iman  ki'a'nwa- 
10  nindizut. 

Mri'madac  papa'i'nabiwat  pajik  sa^na  cigwa'kunamawan 
uglmi'kawawan  i'i'ma  kl*a*ltod  rr11  upimiwanan.  Mldac 
acikiwawat,  intawa  mlsana  lni/u  ka'plnawat  mldac  ini/u 
ka^kabacimawat. 

15  Mlsa  minawa  tcigwa  krarnimadcat,  minawa  aninantcwa- 
bamat.  Anlc  mlsaguna/r11  wandcipimatci'a't  i'i<u  unldcanisa/s. 
Anlc  mlgu'ku  tasing  wabaninigin  antawabamat  Ini/u  uginln. 
Ningutingigu  a'pitci  kawanantamuwat  minawa  antawabamat 
lni/u  uginln.  Mldac  ka'i'cipimadaga'kut  'iY11  saga'i'gan, 

20  mldac  pimacagamat  48i/u  saga'i'gan,  minawa  kago  onontiln 
pitiku'kusininig.  Ka-i-cinansilkank,  kuniginm  uglwabandan 
kistcipikwalk  a'tanig,  ma'ku'tawagan  asawawint.  "Tatata," 
ugri'gon  awiya  "klnina  kibi'kwak,  Nanabucu?" 


"Kawln,"    ugri'nan.      "Ayee,"  ugri'nan   'at;a/u  Nanabucu; 
25    "kin  kibikwa'k,   niclmsa." 

"Taga,   Nanabucu,   potawan.      Kuntigu   kigrkatc." 


69 

there  where  he  had  laid  down  his  pack.  So  then  he 
addressed  the  old  woman,  saying:  "The  place  here  was 
once  full  of  sturgeons."  And  this  he  was  told  by  his 
wife:  "I  dare  say  but  that  you  have  doubtless  disobeyed," 
he  was  told  by  his  wife. 

"Yea,"  he  said  to  her;  "truly,  'Look  not  back,'  I  was 
told  to  no  purpose." 

And  then  was  when  he  angered  his  wife.  "Really  in 
good  sooth  you  are  thoroughly  incapable  of  giving  heed 
to  anything  one  tries  to  tell  you." 

And  this  to  her  said  Nanabushu :  "Quite  true,  I  did  not  do 
what  I  was  uselessly  told."  And  so  then  was  he  repentant. 

Now,  from  there  they  went  searching  round  about,  when 
truly  they  found  some  sturgeon-roe  at  the  place  where 
he  had  put  down  his  pack.  Whereupon  they  then  went 
back  home,  so  accordingly  what  they  fetched  home  was 
what  they  cooked  in  the  kettle. 

And  so  once  more  was  he  already  on  his  way,  once 
more  was  he  looking  for  (sweet-brier  berries).  Now,  this 
was  the  only  source  he  had  to  sustain  his  children.  So 
it  was  every  morning  that  he  went  to  look  for  the  sweet- 
brier  berries.  Nowr  once,  when  they  were  very  much  in 
want  of  food,  he  went  again  to  seek  for  the  sweet-brier 
berries.  Accordingly,  as  he  was  going  across  on  the  ice 
of  the  lake,  and  as  he  travelled  along  by  the  shore  of 
the  lake,  again  he  heard  the  sound  of  something  fall  with 
a  thud  upon  the  ice.  When  he  went  up  to  it,  he  was 
surprised  to  see  a  great  arrow  that  was  there,  with  a 
bear-ear  was  it  feathered.  "Fool,"  he  was  told  by  some 
one,  "is  it  your  arrow,  Nanabushu?" 

"No,"  he  said  to  him.  "Yea,"  to  him  said  Nanabushu; 
"it  is  your  arrow,  my  younger  brother." 

"I  say,  Nanabushu,  kindle  a  fire.  It  seems  that  you 
are  cold." 


;o 
"Aye8,"  ugri-nan;   "nislmisa,  kaga't  nigi'katc,"  ugrrnan. 

Mldac  ka/rcikagi'tcinit.    "Taga,  uno/u  midcin,"  l  ugri'gon. 

Midac  kaga't  ka/rcimidcit  ini'u  aciganan. 
Clgwa    utota'pinamini    48i/u    utoginiwac,    midac   acisigwa- 
5   binat.     Kaslgwabinanit  kahicimadcanit.      Owabaman   tacisi- 
gwa*i*ganit  mi'ipman   navvi'kwam,   mlsa  mlnawa  ka'i'cimock- 
ina*a'nit  ima11  umackimutank. 

Mldac  ka-rci'u'mbiwana'rgut,  o'6'widac  ugri-gon  :   "Am- 

basino    tac    ayangwamisin,    kagi^dac  mlnawa  icictciga/kan. 

10  Ka'i*ninan  dacigu  icictcigan.     Kawln  mlnawa  kida'i'nisinan. 

Mldac    a/ta    ou  Ininan,"  igli-gon.      "  'Au,   mri<u  icimadcan," 

ugi-i'gon. 

Mldac  kagalt  ka  i'cimadcat,  ka'i'cimadciba'tod.  Cigwa 
mlnawa  awiya  unontawa8  sa'kwanigut.  Midac  ka*i*nandank  : 

15  a Kawln  pa'pic  idac  nintaVrnapisl.  Misawagu  awiya  ki'tci- 
winank  liei/u  nimpimiwanan,"  kri'nandam.  Midac  kaga't 
pimataga'kut,  cigwa  bablmiba'to.  Kaga't  uga'kri-go  'iY11 
nwantawat.  "O-o-o,  kungwinr'k  Nanabucu !"  utigo8. 
Anlc  midac  kaga't  kawin  wra'banabisl.  Midac  pinic  ka- 

20  'rciacawaga'kut  awaniban  a'pi  i'i'witi  a'ki'kank. 


Anipapimusat   cayigwa  ubacwantan   'is;i/u  antawat.      Anlc 

minawa  utaninantawabandan  tciki'tciwana'kamiganig.   Mldac 

ri'rna'    ka'i'cipagitciwanat,    midac   kawin  kiabababisi  i'i'ma11 

ka'i'jipagitciwanat.      Ka-ijitagwicink    iwiti    antawat,    midac 

25   kawin    ugiganonasi    ini/u    wiwan.      Ka'ijikawicimut,    kawin 

1  Not  the  moccasins,  but  the  stockings. 


"Yes,"  he  said  to  him-  "my  younger  brother,  truly  I 
am  cold,"  he  said  to  him. 

Thereupon  the  other  removed  his  moccasins.  "I  say, 
eat  these,"  l  (Nanabushu)  was  told. 

Whereupon  he  then  truly  ate  the  stockings. 

Now,  the  other  took  (Nanabushu's)  bag  of  sweet-brier 
berries  and  poured  them  out.  After  he  had  emptied  them 
out,  he  then  started  away.  (Nanabushu)  saw  him  chopping 
a  hole  far  out  upon  the  ice,  and  he  was  again  filling  his 
sack  there. 

And  when  by  the  other  he  was  helped  with  lifting  on 
his  pack,  this  was  he  then  told  :  "  I  beg  of  you  now  take 
pains,  and  repeat  not  the  same  thing.  What  I  have  to 
tell  you,  that  you  do.  Not  again  will  I  give  you  advice. 
This  is  the  last  time  that  I  shall  speak  to  you,"  he  was 
told.  "So  then,  start  you  hence,"  he  was  told. 

Thereupon  truly  off  he  started,  off  he  went  running. 
Presently  another  one  he  heard  yelling  to  him.  And  then 
he  thought:  "Under  no  circumstances  will  I  look,  even 
though  some  one  should  hold  back  on  my  pack,"  he 
(thus)  thought.  Thereupon  truly,  as  he  was  coming  across 
on  the  ice,  he  then  took  a  straight  away  course  as  he  ran. 
Truly  was  he  hard  pressed  by  those  whom  he  heard. 
"Ho,  ho,  ho,  push  Nanabushu!"  was  said  of  him.  Now, 
it  was  true  that  he  was  not  anxious  to  look  behind.  So 
then  at  last,  after  he  had  crossed  the  ice,  there  was  then 
no  one  there  on  the  land. 

As  he  went  walking  along,  he  soon  perceived  that  he 
was  approaching  where  he  lived.  So  again  he  sought  for 
the  place  with  a  deep  depression  in  the  earth.  And  so 
after  he  had  put  down  his  pack  there,  he  accordingly  did 
not  look  back  where  he  had  put  down  his  pack.  When 
he  was  come  at  yonder  place  where  he  dwelt,  he  accord 
ingly  did  not  speak  to  his  wife.  After  he  had  gone  to 


72 

uglkacki'tosln  Ii8i/u  tcinibat.  Mldac  anicagu  ka/i'cicink 
o'O'dac  ugrrnan  Ini/u  wlwan:  "Kagii't  mlnawa  nintanugii- 
cawantagus." 

"Intacka  kibwabablni'tanzimltug  waylba  mlnawa  amantc 
5   ka/i'gowanan.       Kitiniga'a'g     kinltcanisinanig    bablni'taman 
kago.      Amn,  kagona  kigri'go?" 

"Aye8,   amantc  midac  ka-i-ciwabatogwan  ;  mldac  igu  'iri/u 
ka'i'goyan   ka'i'cictcigayan." 

Cigwasa  owabandanawa   4isi/u  wabaninig.      ulAla/u  mindi- 

10  moya!"    ugri'nan    mi/u    wlwan.       Mrrdac    ka'i'cimadcawat 

iiman    kipipagitwanat,    kaga't  anm  ka'rcinank  iman  klpagi- 

tciwanat    wantcitagu    mockinani    mini'k    i'i'ma11  wana'kami- 

ganig  namawan  mockinawan.      Anlc  mldac  awatciwanawat 

kabagljik.       "Mlmawin    i'i>u    tciwabanicink,"    ugrrnan    ini/u 

15   wlwan. 

"Aye8,"    ugri'gon  ;    "mlsa  i'i/>u  pimatisiwat  Igi/u  kinltcan 
isinanig." 

Mldac  pisan   mri'rna11  ka'i'ciwawlsiniwat. 

8.    NANABUSIIU  AND  THE   WOLVES. 

Mldac  ningtitinigu  papamusat  awiya  owabaman,  kuniginin 
20  tna'i'gana8  Izan.    Ka'rcipipagimat,  ka'plciicanit  'i'^ma11  ayat. 


O'o'widac  kri*ckitowag  igi/u  ma'i'nganag :  "Kagu  pacux 
alpitci  ica'kagun,  kago  klwri'gowa,"  ugiina8.  Mldac  kaga't 
nagawasa  wantcigabawiwat  kanonawat.  Wo'O'widac  ugl- 
•i'gowan :  "  Amantcwlni/u  kltotamag  ingutci  wayabamina- 
25  gogun?  Kawinina  indinawamaslwanan  kitinandamina'ku  ? 
Pacuginlnigu  kitinawamininim ;  migininigu  Ia8a/u  kosiwa 


73 

bed,  he  was  not  able  to  sleep.  And  after  he  had  spent 
some  time  merely  lying  there,  this  he  then  said  to  his 
wife:  "Truly,  again  to  no  purpose  have  I  been  blessed." 

"I  fancy  that  perhaps  again  you  were  not  long  remem 
bering  what  had  been  told  you.  You  do  our  children  a 
hurt  by  your  failure  to  obey.  What,  was  there  something 
you  were  told?" 

"Yes,  but  it  is  uncertain  how  it  will  turn  out;  for 
according  as  I  was  told  so  I  did." 

So  presently  they  saw  that  the  morrow  was  come. 
"Now,  then,  old  woman!"  he  said  to  his  wife.  Accord 
ingly,  after  they  had  started  off  (and  had  come)  to  the 
place  where  he  had  left  his  pack,  truly  what  was  he  to 
behold  there  where  he  had  left  his  pack  but  a  place  full 
to  the  brim  with  as  many  sturgeons  as  the  basin  could 
hold.  So  therefore  were  they  busy  lugging  throughout 
the  day.  "No  doubt  but  that  now  we  shall  live  through 
the  winter,"  he  said  to  his  wife. 

"Yes,"  he  was  told;    "therefore  saved  are  our  children." 

And  so  in  comfort  with  plenty  to  eat  they  continued  there. 

8.  NANABUSHU  AND  THE  WOLVES. l 

Now,  once  on  a  time  as  he  was  travelling  about,  he 
saw  somebody.  Lo,  they  were  wolves!  After  he  had  called 
aloud  to  them,  then  they  came  over  to  where  he  was. 

And  this  said  the  wolves:  "Go  you  not  so  very  close, 
for  he  wishes  to  say  something  to  you,"  they  said  of  him. 
Whereupon  truly,  at  some  distance  away,  was  where  they 
stood  when  they  spoke  to  him.  Then  this  they  were  told : 
"I  should  like  to  know  why  you  act  so  whenever  I  happen 
to  see  you  anywhere.  Is  it  always  your  idea  that  I  am 
not  your  kinsman?  Why,  I  am  very  closely  related  to 

1  For  other  versions  see  Nos.  9,  30,  44. 


74 

nldcikiwanzi."  Oo'dac  ugri'nangoman  Ini/u  alkiwanz!maT- 
nganan :  "Nltcizazfkizl,"  ugrrnan.  Midac  ka/rnat  ini/u 
ugwisisini  Ini/u  alkiwanzImaTnganan.  "Anlc  nintocimag," 
ugrrna8  li':i'u  maTngana8.  Wo'crwidac  ugrrnan :  "Anlndi 
5  acayag?  ugri'nan. " 

"Wo'o'witi  nlbinunk  kini'tagfabanigf  I^i/u  kitocimaof.  inldac 

O  •  O         O  •  O   '  • 

iiwiti  acayang.  Midac  a'pana  iwiti  ki'a'santcikuyangiban 
ugimrkawiawabanin.  Mldacigu  iwiti  ka'kina  kaicra'santci- 
kuyangiban  mlciac  iwiti  anubimi'i'cayank." 

10  O'0'dac  ugri'na8  *a8a/u  Nanabucu  :  "Ml  gaya  nm  'i'i'witi 
pami-i'cayan,  mlsa'iTsan  kataniciwltclwinaguk,"  uglma8. 

Anlc,  mlsa  kaga't  cigwa  kra'niwawltclwat.  Anlc  kawln 
keclca"  utibi'a'sm  aniwidciwat.  Ta'kasinini  pimusawat. 
Midac  cigwa  unagucininig,  "Mlmawlni  ru  cigwa  tcinantaga- 

15  baclyank,"  i'kitowag.  Midac  kagact  aninantakabaciwat. 
Kaga't  cigwa  umi'kanawa  iman  kabaciwat ;  anotc  iman 
apagata'a'nunk  wantci-irninamanit.  "Mlsa  uma,"  i'kitowaL'. 
Cigwa  wi'kacimowag ;  cayigwa  mlciac  ka'i'cikicipagabawinit 
*ij:i/u  kawicimonit  anic  mlgu  gayli  win  andotank  'i{:i/u  ka- 

20  wicimunit.  Ocr  ugri'gon  Ini/u  a'kiwa^Ima'rnganan :  "Mi- 
ziwa  iu  Igi/u  kitocimag  i-i-ma11  cingicimuwat  icikawicimun 
kaya ;  kuntigu  kigrkatc." 


"Ayec,  kaga't  ningikatc."     Anlc  mlgu  iu  acimadwasininig 

Ini/u  wlbitan  Ia8a/u  Nanabucu,  a'pltcikrkatcit.     Midac  kagiilt 

25   ka'i'cikawicimut     i'i'ma11     nisawicininit,     o-o'clac    krkitowan 

Ini/u    a4kiwanzima'i-nganan :     "Taga,    kimicomaiwa    awi'i-'k 

kibl'tawacaniwan." 


75 

you  ;  now  that  father  of  yours  is  my  brother."  And  this 
was  the  way  he  told  of  how  he  was  related  to  the  old 
Wolf:  "He  is  of  my  old  brother,"  he  said  to  them.  And 
this  was  what  he  said  to  the  son  of  the  old  Wolf:  "Why 
(you  are)  my  nephews,"  he  said  to  the  Wolves.  And  this 
he  said  to  them  :  "Whither  are  you  going?"  he  said  to  them. 

"Off  over  here  last  summer  your  nephews  did  some 
killing,  and  it  is  thither  we  are  going :  for  it  was  always 
there  that  we  have  cached  what  (my  children)  have  found. 
Therefore  over  to  the  place  where  we  had  cached  away 
everything  is  where  we  are  endeavoring  to  go." 

And  this  to  them  said  Nanabushu :  "So  am  I  bound 
for  that  place  too,  therefore  I  will  go  along  with  you," 
he  said  to  them. 

Well,  it  was  true  that  he  then  went  with  them  upon 
their  journey.  To  be  sure,  he  could  hardly  keep  up  as 
he  travelled  along  with  them.  A  cold  wind  was  blowing 
as  they  went.  And  then  as  evening  was  coming  on,  "It 
is  perhaps  now  time  for  us  to  look  for  a  place  to  camp," 
they  said.  Thereupon  they  truly  went  seeking  for  a  place 
to  carnp.  Very  soon  they  found  a  place  where  they  were 
to  camp  -,  all  about  a  spot  where  the  wind  had  full  sweep 
was  where  they  prepared  a  place  to  camp.  "Here  is  a  place," 
they  said.  At  once  they  made  ready  to  lie  down  ;  so  after 
they  had  (each)  circled  a  spot  in  which  they  were  to  lie,  then 
the  same  thing  did  he  when  he  lay  down  to  sleep.  This 
he  was  told  by  the  old  Wolf:  "In  among  where  lie  your 
nephews  do  you  lie  too;  it  seems  as  if  you  were  cold." 

"Yes,  indeed  I  am  cold."  Now,  then  the  chatter  of 
Nanabushu's  teeth  could  be  heard,  so  very  cold  was  he. 
Thereupon  truly,  after  he  had  lain  down  in  the  midst  of 
where  they  lay,  this  then  said  the  old  Wolf:  "Pray,  let 
your  uncle  have  the  top-covering."  l 

1   Referring  to  the  tail. 


76 

Mldac  kaga't  pinanowaniwan  Ini/u  pacig,  mlnawa  ini/u 
pacio--,  mitugigu  kauntcinibat.  Kaga'tsa  klcungwan.  Midac 
ningutinigu  kuckusit,  kaga'tsa  abwaso.  0'6'wiclac  krr'kito: 
"Kaga'tsa,  nintabwackagunan  Ini/u  animowaniuwucan !" 
5  Ningutci  ka'rcra^pagita'irt,  o*o*dac  uglmadwa'i'gon  mi/u 
a'kiwanz!mainganan  :  "Kagatsa  kitimlgamag  Igi/u  kitocimag," 
ugl'i'gon  lni/u  a4kiwanzlma'rnganan. 

Anlc  wlbagu  mlnawa  anigi'katci,  anlc  cigwa  mlnawa 
madwawasininig  Ini/u  wlbitan. 

10  "Mlmawlnigu  cayigwa  tcigawatcit  'as:a/u  kimicoma'i'wa. 
Aninta  wlniu  mlnawa  awra'siwag  mri/>u  kibl'tawacaniwa  ?" 

o 

Mldac  kaga't  'asa/u  pacig  ka'i'ciinanuwanit,  minawa 
Ia8a/u  pacig. 

Anlc  migu  mlnawa  kra'niklcosit. 

15  Anlc,  midac  cigwa  tciwabaninig,  anic  cayrgwa  wimad- 
cawag  mlnawa.  Anic  cayigwa  ugri'gon  ini/u  alkiwiinzl- 
ma*rnganan :  "Mlsa  nongum  wunagwucig  tcitagwicinang 
iwiti  pamri'cayank  klcpin  kicfkayank." 

Midac     kaga't     kanlcimadcawat,     midac     anupimiba'tot 

20  Nanabucu.       Ningutinigu    bapimusawat,     "Mlmawin    cigwa 

tciglwlsiniyanguban,"      udigon      Ini/u      a'kiwa^zTma-rnganan. 

Mlsa  kaga't  cayigwa  Nanabucu  ina :   "Taga,  ani'a'tpltcipo- 

dawan." 

Mlsa    kaga't    ka'ir'kwa'kwisitot,    midac    natunawat   Ini/u 
25   utickuta'kanan. 

"Anln  acictcigayan  ?"  udigon  Ini/u  alkiwanzlma"rnganan. 
Cigwa  kanoniman  Ini/u  pacig:  "Taga,  kin,  potawan," 
inimawan. 

Mldac    kaga't    pimiijawan    i'i*man    krtrkwa'kwisitot    ini/u 
30  mi'tigon  •,     cayigwa    acipacitcikwaskwanutaminit,    panagum 
amiskwa'kunanig. 


77 

Thereupon  truly  one  of  them  tossed  his  tail  over  him, 
and  the  same  (did)  another ;  so  in  that  way  he  went  to 
sleep.  Truly,  very  warm  he  slept.  And  now,  when  once 
he  woke,  he  truly  was  in  a  sweat.  So  this  he  said  : 
"Forsooth,  but  now  I  am  made  to  sweat  by  these  old 
dog-tails !"  When  aside  he  had  flung  them,  this  he  heard 
said  to  him  by  the  old  Wolf:  "In  truth,  very  shamefully 
you  use  your  nephews,"  he  was  told  by  the  old  Wolf. 

So  when   in  a  little  while  he   was  again  becoming  cold, 

o  o 

then  already  again  the  chatter  of  his  teeth  could  he  heard. 

"Without  doubt  your  uncle  is  already  freezing  to  death. 
Why  do  you  not  again  let  him  have  your  top-coverings?" 

Thereupon  truly,  after  one  had  tossed  his  tail  over  him, 
then  another  (did)  likewise. 

Naturally  then  again  he  was  warmed. 

Well,  it  was  now  time  for  the  morrow  to  come,  so  of 
course  they  were  already  anxious  to  be  off  again.  So 
presently  he  was  told  by  the  old  Wolf:  "It  is  this  evening 
that  we  shall  arrive  at  the  place  for  which  we  are  bound, 
if  only  we  hasten." 

Thereupon  truly,  as  on  their  way  they  started,  then  with 
effort  went  Nanabushu  running.  Now,  once  as  they  were 
walking  along,  "It  surely  must  be  time  for  us  to  have 
eaten,"  he  was  told  by  the  old  Wolf.  It  was  true  that 
presently  Nanabushu  was  told:  "Pray,  go  on  ahead  and 
have  a  fire  built  up." 

Thereupon  truly,  after  he  had  gathered  his  wood  into 
a  pile,  he  then  sought  for  his  flint. 

"What  are  you  doing?"  he  was  asked  by  the  old  Wolf. 
Presently  (the  old  WTolf)  addressed  one  (of  his  sons):  "I 
say,  you  kindle  the  fire,"  thus  (the  son)  was  told. 

Thereupon  (the  young  Wolf)  went  over  to  where  (Nana 
bushu)  had  gathered  the  wood  into  a  pile  ;  the  instant  he 
leaped  over  (the  wood),  up  then  blazed  the  fire. 


73 
"Na',   mlsai  iu  acictcigank  rru  wapo'tawangin." 

Mlsa'   ka'i'ciwlsiniwat  rrma11,  mldac  cigwa  kra'nimadca- 

wat ;  anlc  wrkagwatataguicinog.      Kawln  kanaga  anuglpan- 

gicimtmit,  nawantcic  pimusawag.    "Anlc,  mritU  pacu7  cigwa," 

5   utigoc.       Mldac     uskitibi'katini    acp!    wadi'tamuwat.       Anlc 

mldac  i'i-ma11  ka'i'cikabaciwat  kl'ircikawag.    Cigwasa  natas- 

antcigowag.      Anlc    kaya    win    mina   aya'r,    uto'pa'kunisag 

mlna.      Mlnawa    wacackwatowan    mina  Nanabucu.      "Kagu 

win  ka'a'pltcitibi^kak  wabandangan  •   pamagu  kiglcap  klga- 

10  wabandan,"  kri'na.      Mldac  ka'i'nint :    "Pama  kigicap." 


Mlsa  acinanontayagantank  tcibwawabaninig.  "Tagapina, 
ningawabandan,"  kri-nandank.  Mlsa  kaga't  ka'i'ciwaban- 
dank,  anln  ka'i'cinank  wayabandank  kagwanisagimistca- 
'kwatini  48i/u  monsonagic !  Mldac  ka/rcipa'kwandank,  mldac 
15  ka'i'ciwabaninik,  caylgwa  kwa'kitawan ;  anln  ka'rcinawat 
kagwanisagimiHca'kwatini  'iGi/u  monsunagic !  Anlc  caylgwa 
kaya  win  kwa/ki'ta,  o'O'dac  ugri*gos :  "Intigoguca  tibi'kunk 
kimadwantciganaban." 


Caylgwasa     kayawm     udanumatasiton     lis'i/>u    kaya    win 
20  kamlnt.      Klyanabitacin    48i/u    to'pa'kunisag,    kaya  Ini/u  wa 
cackwatowan    klyanabitacin.      Mldac    uba'pH'gon.       "Anln 
waridcitotaman   li}]i/u  kri'cictcigayan?  kawln   kitagipapaman- 
danzln  a'pl'tcitibi'kak,  nackadac  ajrrnlga'rtisuyan.    Kagatsa 


79 

"There,  that  is  the  way  to  do  when  one  intends  to 
make  a  fire." 

And  so  after  they  had  eaten  there,  then  presently  upon 
their  way  they  started ;  for  they  were  trying  to  arrive 
there  (that  day).  They  did  noj:  stop  even  when  the  sun 
went  down,  right  on  they  kept  going.  "Well,  it  is  a 
little  way  now,"  he  was  told.  And  it  was  in  the  twilight 
when  they  arrived  there.  Now,  it  was  after  they  had 
gone  into  camp  there  that  they  built  a  shelter.  Presently 
they  went  after  (the  contents  of)  the  cache.  And  as  for 
(Nanabushu)  himself,  he  was  given  a  certain  thing,  some 
choice  firewood  was  he  given.  Besides,  some  fungus  was 
given  Nanabushu.  "Don't  you  look  at  it  during  the  night 
time  ;  not  till  in  the  morning  shall  you  look  at  it,"  he  was 
told.  And  so  this  was  what  he  was  told:  "Not  till  in 
the  morning." 

And  as  he  grew  restless  waiting  for  the  morning  before 
it  was  time  to  come,  "Now,  really,  I  should  like  to  see 
it,"  he  (thus)  thought.  It  was  true  that  after  he  had 
seen  it,  what  should  he  behold  as  he  looked  at  it  but  an 
enormously  large  moose-gut !  And  now,  after  he  had 
bitten  off  a  piece,  and  then  after  he  had  looked  at  it, 
that  moment  (from  where  they  sat)  did  they  turn  about 
to  reach  for  something ;  (and)  what  was  he  to  see  but 
them  (in  the  act  of  reaching  hold  of)  a  wonderfully  large 
moose-£ut !  So  then  also  turned  he  in  his  seat  to  reach 

o 

for  something,  and  this  he  was  told:  "It  truly  seemed  by 
the  sound  you  made  last  night  that  you  had  been  eating." 
Already  now  was  he  too  trying  to  take  out  the  things 
that  had  been  given  to  him.  The  mark  of  his  teeth  was 
on  the  choice  firewood,  and  on  the  fungus  was  the  mark 
of  his  teeth.  Thereupon  fun  was  made  of  him.  "For 
what  reason  did  you  do  what  you  did?  You  should  not 
have  bothered  with  it  during  the  night,  for  behold  the 


So 


kawln     klni'tanontanzl,     iwidac     iniga'toyan     'isi/u     kimisat. 
Anlc,  wagunac  win  kamldcit?" 


Misa  intawa  acra'camigut  mlnawa  'isi/u.  Anlc  umisawi- 
namawan.  Midac  ka-rcra'camigut,  anlc,  misa/  klwisinit 
5  kaya  win.  O'O'dac  ugri-gon  Ini/u  a'kiwa^ima'i^ganan : 
"Ambasano,  papamigusita,"  ugri'gon.  "Wa'a'wa  pajig 
kitocim  kigapapanantawantcigam,  mlgu  iu  pa' pic  mminan. 
Kaga't  umaci'a'ii  Ini/u  awasiyan." 


Midac     kaga't     ka'i'cikusiwat,    a'pana    kamadcanit    'i!:i/u 
10  utockinawamiwa.         Wrkaguna     pitcinag     kanimadcawad. 

A'pana  a'i'ci'kawanit  (iYu  utockinawamiwa  nudac  anipapi- 
ma'a'nawat.  Midac  cigvva  ningutingigu  anipima*a'nawat, 
ninguting  anrrnabiwat,  ugiwabandanawa  upimwackltlwinini 
ka'u-ntcimaclciba'tonit.  O'o-dac  ugrrgon  Ini/u  alkiwanzi- 
T5  ma'rnganan :  "Anra'yamu*  kitocim  'ifii/u  u'pl'taw^acan." 


"Sa11!     Anln    katotaman    i'i>u    mackitlwinic    kaniayayan?" 

i'kito    'a"a/u    Nanabucu.      O'0'vvidac    udigon  ini/u  alkiwanzl- 

ma-rnganan :      "Mamindaga    kigri-nigama    'aV11    kitocim." 

Obiminasi'kamini   4iRi/u  mackitlwin  ;   ac-i'oda'pinaminit  miclac 

20  aciba'pawabinaminit ;  waboyan  idac  uglta'kunamini. 


"Icta!    Pidon,   nitcizazi'kizi,   ninganipimuntan,"  ugri'nan. 


Midac  kaga't  ka'pljimmigut  mldac  anipimondank.     Anic, 
mlsax    mlnawa    kanlcimadcawat.      Ningutingigu    anipapimu- 


8i 

disappointment  you  have  done  yourself!  Truthfully  are 
you  not  good  at  giving  heed,  and  on  that  account  have 
you  disappointed  the  craving  of  your  belly.  Why,  what 
on  earth  is  he  going  to  eat?" 

And  so  accordingly  was  he  again  given  that  to  eat. 
Now  he  felt  a  desire  for  (what  they  had).  And  after  he 
was  given  food,  why,  he  ate  too.  And  this  he  was  told 
by  the  old  Wolf:  "Pray,  let  us  go  travelling  about  with 
all  our  possessions,"  he  (thus)  was  told.  "Along  with  all 
of  these  nephews  of  yours  shall  you  go  as  you  journey 
about  hunting  for  game,  and  this  gift  I  make  you  for 
all  time.  Truly,  he  is  good  in  getting  game." 

It  was  true  that  when  (he  and  the  Wolf)  left  the  camp, 
already  off  had  gone  their  companions.  Not  for  a  while 
afterwards  did  they  leave.  Ever  in  the  trail  of  their 
companions  did  they  keep  as  they  followed  along  behind. 
And  then  occasionally  while  they  continued  holding  the 
trail  of  the  others,  once  in  a  while  as  they  looked  when 
going  along,  they  beheld  the  fresh  droppings  (in  places) 
from  which  (their  companions)  started  running  (again). 
Now,  this  he  was  told  by  the  old  Wolf:  "As  you  go,  take 
with  you  the  top-covering  of  your  nephew." 

"Disgusting!  What  should  I  do  with  the  yielding  filth 
that  I  should  take  it  along?"  said  Nanabushu.  And  this 
he  was  told  by  the  old  Wolf:  "Miserably  pitiful  have  you 
made  your  nephew  by  saying  that."  Then  he  went  to 
where  the  fresh  dropping  was ;  when  he  reached  (and) 
took  it  up,  he  then  gave  it  a  shaking ;  then  a  (white) 
blanket  he  was  holding  in  his  hand. 

"(I)  declare!  Fetch  it  hither,  my  old  friend,  I  will 
carry  it  along  upon  my  back,"  (Nanabushu)  said  to  him. 

Whereupon  truly  hither  came  the  other,  who  then  gave 
it  to  him,  and  accordingly  then  went  he  on  his  way  carrying 
it  upon  his  back.  Well,  so  then  again  were  they  off  on 

6 — PUBL.    AMER.    ETHN.    SOC.    VOL.    VII. 


82 

sawat  utanri'gon  Ini/u  a'kiwa^Iyan ;  wcrcr  udigon :  "Mlsa 
iu  Ini/u  tcro'nitcaniwan  paminlcawawa  lgi/u  kidocimag. 
Anic,  mlsa  gaga't  cigwa  aniga'kiawat  Igi/u  kidocimag. " 

Ningutingigu  kinibataga'kwismini   Ii8i/u  wlbitani. 

5  "Naginin,  Nanabucu,  midugoma  anu-a'nipimwawagwan 
Ini/u  monson.  Nanabucu,  taga  ani'a-ya11  'i^i7'1  ubikwa'k 
'aca/u  kidocim." 

"Sa,    bina !      Amnda    katotaman   'i8i/u  animwabidic  kani- 
ayayan  ?" 

10  "Kagatsa  kidinigamag  Igiu  kitocimag."  Ajiblmra'yaminit 
nani'kakubitonit  Ini/u  a'kiwa^Ima'rnganan.  Mldac  ajipa- 
wiwapinaminit,  kuniginln,  kaga't  pikwa'k  uglta'kunamini ! 

"Pldon,  taga,"  ugl'i'nan. 

Mldac     kaga't     ka'ijimmigut ;     ka'i'jipimiwitot.       Cigwa 
15   ninguting     ugiwabamawan     cingicininit    udqjima^.       Kawm 
kanaga  ningutci  tcimiskwlwakunaganig.      Kuniginln,  Nana 
bucu    kanona :    "Kani'tagawagwan    igi/u    kitocimag.      Mlsa 
iu  andotamuwat  ma'kawawatcin  ini/u  mdnzon."      Kamdtcigi- 
sinit    !ni/u    a'kiw^slyan.      U'AU,    la11,    Nanabucu,    wikici'tota 
20  i-i'man  kataciwiyasikayank." 


"Wagunan  ri>u  kawiyasi'katamank?" 

Mldac    agut  Ini/u  a'kiwa^zImaTngan  :    "Kagatsa  kitiniga- 
mag  kitocimag." 


Mldac  kaga't  sibickatc  witci'a't  ucigawat.    Kawin  kanaga 

25   tcimadcicininit,     plnic    panima    kaklcigawat    paplndigawag. 

Anln  kaicinank?  Cigwa  unawi'a-   kaya  win,   abi'tagu  wlnin 


83 

their  way.  Now  once  while  they  were  walking  along,  he 
was  addressed  by  the  old  (Wolf).  This  he  was  told  :  "It  is 
a  big  cow  that  your  nephews  are  after.  Why,  it  is  true 
that  now  are  your  nephews  pressing  close  upon  it." 

And  presently  (he  saw)  sticking  in  a  tree  the  tooth 
(of  one  of  his  nephews). 

"  Look,  Nanabushu !  perhaps  here  may  have  been  where 
they  shot  at  a  moose,  but  failed  to  hit  it.  Nanabushu, 
pray,  take  that  arrow  of  your  nephew's  as  you  go." 

"Pshaw!  What  am  I  to  do  with  that  old  dog-tooth, 
that  I  should  take  it  along?" 

"Truly,  indeed,  have  you  done  your  nephews  a  wrong 
by  saying  that."  By  giving  it  a  twist  the  old  Wolf  pulled 
it  out ;  and  when  he  shook  it,  lo,  an  arrow  was  he  truly 
holding  in  his  hand ! 

"Fetch  it  hither,   please,"  he  said  to  (the  old   Wolf). 

It    was    true    that  it  was  given  to  him ;   after  which  he 

o 

took  it  along.  Then  by  and  by  they  saw  his  nephews 
lying  down.  Nowhere  at  all  was  there  snow  on  the 
ground.  Behold,  Nanabushu  was  addressed  (in  these 
words):  "Some  game  must  your  nephews  have  killed. 
That  is  the  way  they  act  whenever  they  have  found  a 
moose."  Then  happy  was  the  old  (Wolf).  "Corne  on, 
Nanabushu !  let  us  make  a  place  where  we  can  prepare 
the  meat." 

"Where  in  the  world  is  the  meat  for  us  to  dry?" 
Whereupon  was  he  told  by  the  old  Wolf:  "Truly,  indeed, 
pitiful  have  you  made  your  nephews  by  saying  that." 

Thereupon  truly,  much  against  his  will,  (Nanabushu) 
helped  them  make  the  lodge.  Not  at  all  did  he  move 
from  where  he  lay,  (which  he  continued  to  do)  till  later 
on,  when  they  had  finished  the  lodge,  (and)  one  by  one 
they  were  coming  in.  What  was  he  now  to  see?  Already 
was  he  allotted  a  share,  half  of  the  fat  was  the  share 


84 

kici/u  wanawi-rnt.  Mlsa  pitclnag  I  rman  klminwandank 
"Mlnangwana  iu  tciwlsiniyan  kaya  nln,"  krrnandam. 
"Wandcitagu  kaga'tiguna  minira-yang." 

9.  NANABUSHU  AND  THE  WOLVES,   Continued. 

Ningutingigu      rrman     mamonsutkawat,      "Ambasanona, 
5   kosinan  ta-a<cka.     Mlgwantacinac  iu  alta  pimisa'kwat,"  ugl- 
•i -Hawaii  Ini/u  osiwan. 

Mldac  kaga't  cigwa  kimadci'tanit  lni/u  osiwan.  O^owidac 
udiguwan  :  "Ambasano,  kagu"  kanawabamici'kagun  wofio/u 
wra-'kayan.  Ayangwamisin,  Nanabucu,"  udigon  ini/u 

10  a'kiwa^zfmaTnganan. 
Mldac  kaga't. 

Amc  Nanabucu  u'kunacic  acikackackiwicink,  misa  pisin- 
dawawat,  indigunandagu  madwagana'pi'tciga.  "Taga  pina, 
ninga'rnab,"  inandam  Nanabucu.  Kaga't  aci'a'gwasaigi- 

15  nank  'isi/u  ulkunacic,  cigwa  kaga't  owabaman  na'i'ta  i*i'u 
ubigwa'kugananini  na'rta  utowawicacanatamini ;  kagagu 
mica'klgablgagotani  rru  usibickanamowinini.  Mldac  kana- 
wabamat,  ningutingigu  aciku'tigwandaminit  a'pidci  i'i'ma11 
uckmcigunk  acipangisininig.  Panagu,  tcon,  ton  kaini'tank. 

20  "Cigwadac,  Nanabucu  ningwackwagana*a'mawa !"  Mldac 
a'kidut  ;afia/u  alkiwanzl:  "Ayawi'k  kimicoma'rwa,  ta'kaba- 
wani'k!" 


Midac     kaga't     krta'kabawinint,     midac    ka'i'cimi'kawit. 
Mldac     ka-i-gut    Ini/u    alkiwanzlyan :     "Nanabucu.    kanawa- 
25   bamivvambansa." 


85 

given  him.  So  then  was  he  well  pleased  over  it.  "It  is 
certain  that  I  shall  eat  too,"  he  thought.  "Truly,  very 
excellently  are  we  now  living." 

9.   NANABUSHU  AND  THE  WOLVES,   Continued} 

Now  once,  while  they  were  fixing  moose-meat  there, 
"Please  let  our  father  boil  the  broken  bones  for  the 
marrow.  Therefore  then  let  him  be  the  only  one  to  do 
the  cooking,"  they  said  of  their  father. 

Thereupon  truly  began  their  father  upon  his  work.  So 
this  were  they  told  by  him:  "I  beg  of  you,  watch  me  not 
while  I  am  at  this  work  of  boiling  bones  for  the  marrow. 
Have  a  care,  Nanabushu,"  he  was  told  by  the  old  Wolf. 

Thereupon  truly  (such  was  what  happened). 

Now,  as  Nanabushu  lay  wrapped  in  his  old  soiled  blanket, 
and  as  they  listened  to  (their  father),  it  seemed  by  the 
sound  as  if  he  were  gnawing  upon  a  bone.  "I  say,  now, 
I  will  take  a  look,"  (thus)  thought  Nanabushu.  Truly,  as 
he  quietly  lifted  his  old  soiled  blanket,  he  saw  him  at  the 
very  moment  when  he  was  biting  on  an  ulna,  but  at  just 
the  time  when  it  slipped  from  his  mouth ;  and  nearly  to 
the  ground  was  stringing  the  (old  Wolf's)  saliva.  And 
now,  as  he  was  watching  him,  then  of  a  sudden  (the  old 
Wolf)  lost  his  hold  (on  the  bone)  in  his  mouth,  (and) 
straight  yonder  into  (Nanabushu's)  eye  it  struck.  Then 
nothing  but  tcon,  ton,  was  the  sound  he  heard.  "Oh,  to 
Nanabushu  slipped  a  bone  from  my  mouth!"  Whereupon 
said  the  old  (Wolf):  "Attend  to  your  uncle,  cool  him 
with  water !" 

And  so  they  truly  cooled  him  off  with  water,  whereupon 
he  was  then  revived.  Accordingly  was  he  then  told  by 
the  old  (Wolf) :  "Nanabushu,  really  you  were  looking  at  me." 

i  See  Nos.  8,  30,  44. 


86 

"Kawln,  kawln  !" 

"Nanabucu,   kanawabamiwambansagu." 
Amc     cigwa     kigicap,     amn     aya'pitcisigwanig    pimida? 
Amc  udacamiguwan  kigicap   lifc'i'u  uda'kanini. 

5  Cigwa  udinan  :  "Ambasano,  mn  ni'tam  ninga-aftka," 
udina15.  Midac  kaga't  a'kat.  "Anic  mlgu  gaya  nln,  kawln 
wfka  ninganawabamigosl  Ii8i/u  alkayan.  Amc  mlcigwa 
tcigackackiwicinag."  Amc  tcaTgwa  umadclplsiganaanan 
Ini/u  a'kanan.  Kagatsa  pimitawikanagatiniwan.  Miguna 
10  anislwaganatank  li{:i/u  mini'k  pamitawikanagatini'k,  cigwa 
kumaa'pl  plti'kwacinon  kackackiwicininit  Ini/u  a'kiw^zlma- 
•rganan.  Wawanigu  ugrtrnabandan  lisi/u  mangikanagatinig 
ulkan  ka'rcra'cogana/a'nk,  ka'i'cipaki'ta'O'wat  Ini/u  alki- 
wanz!ma*rn2fanan.  Amc  m!sa/  aciniwanawat.  Ocodac  um- 

o  •       •  •  •  o 

15  -i  na*"'  'i{:i/u  utocima8 :  "Nackana,  ta'kabawani'k !"  ugrrnan. 
Medac  ka'i'nat:  "Kanawabamlwambanisa  nltcizazi'kisi. 
Misa'  aci'ayayan  awiya  kanawabamitcin." 


Anic    mrr11    cigwa   kimi'kawit  waVu  a'kiwa^ima-rngan. 

Wo^owidac  ki'i-'kito:  "Nanabucu  nimpakilta<u'lk,"  kri-'kito; 

20   "untcitagu    nimpakilta*umtk1"    kri-'kito    wa*a*u    a4kiwanzima- 

•rngfan.      "Kawln    kuca    anawi  ninp;anawabaniasiban ,"  kri'- 

O    •  C5    •  ' 

'kito  wacau  a'kiwa^ima-rngan.      "Anic  pamasana  kaya  nln 
kiga'a'camininim." 

o  • 

Midac    kaga't    kigicap.      Cigwa    anlc  na  Ini/u  uda'ki'kon 

25   kanabatc  wlgwasaba'kwang  a'pi'tcisigwani  4j:i/u  upimita'kan. 

Cigwasa     minawa    udacama    ;i8i/u    udocimas.       Amc    mlsa7 

cigwa    kidamwawat    Ini/u    umonzumiwan,    "Mlmawin    cigwa 


8; 

"No,  no!" 

"Nanabushu,   really  you  were  looking  at  me." 

So  when  (came)  the  morning,  how  thick  was  the  grease 
frozen!  So  they  were  fed  in  the  morning  upon  the  grease 
made  by  boiling  the  bones. 

Now  (Nanabushu)  said  to  them:  "Pray,  let  me  have  a 
turn  at  making  grease  from  bones  broken  and  boiled,"  he 
said  to  them.  Thereupon  truly  he  made  some  grease. 
"Now,  it  is  the  same  with  me  too,  never  should  I  be 
watched  while  at  work  making  grease  from  broken  bones. 
So  therefore  cover  yourselves  up."  Now  began  he  upon 
the  work  of  cracking  the  bones.  Truly  very  greasy  were 
(the  bones).  Now,  while  he  sucked  the  marrow  from  as 
many  bones  as  had  grease  in  them,  at  some  distance  away, 
with  his  head  towards  (Nanabushu  and)  rolled  up  in  his 
blanket,  lay  the  old  Wolf.  With  care  he  selected  a  bone 
of  great  size  which  he  had  split  crosswise,  (and)  with  it 
he  hit  the  old  Wolf.  So  he  then  killed  (the  old  Wolf). 
Now,  this  he  said  to  his  nephews:  "Mercy,  cool  him  off 
with  some  water!"  he  said  to  them.  And  this  was  what 
he  said  of  him:  "My  old  friend  was  certainly  looking  at 
me.  That  is  the  way  I  behave  whenever  any  one  is 
watching  me." 

So  then  presently  was  the  old  Wolf  revived.  And  this 
he  said:  "By  Nanabushu  was  I  struck,"  he  said;  "purposely 
was  I  hit  by  him,"  said  the  old  Wolf.  "No  attempt  what 
ever  did  I  make  to  watch  him,"  said  the  old  Wolf.  "So 
not  till  after  a  while  will  I  feed  you." 

Thereupon  truly  was  it  now  morning.  According  to 
the  story,  the  grease  in  his  kettle  was  frozen  as  thick  as 
a  sheet  of  birch-bark  covering  of  the  lodge.  Now,  again 
he  fed  his  nephews  on  it.  So  by  the  time  they  had  eaten 
up  their  moose,  "It  must  be  time  for  us  now  to  move 
camp,"  he  was  told  by  the  old  (Wolf).  And  so  he  was 


88 

tciguslyang, "    utigon    ini/u    a'kiwa^zlyan.      Mldac    agut    Ini/u 
a'kiwa^zlyan  :    "Pacik  kiminin  was;a/u  ningwisis,"  utigon. 

Anlc    unana/kuman.      "Mlsadac    izan    rru    ka/irndcimino 
ayayayan.       Intawa     mlgu    oma    ka'u*ndcit,"    udinan    !ni/u 
5   a'kiwanzyan. 

"Anlc,  mlsagu  iu  wabank  tciguslyang,"  utigon  Ini/u  a'ki- 
wazlyan. 

Anlc  mlsa  gagat  cigwa  kusiwat.  "Namaguna  aya  'a<<;a/u 
kawabanicimi'k,"  ugri'gon  Ini11  a'kiwaziyan. 

10       Mldac  kaga't. 

10.  THE  DEATH  OF  NANABUSHU'S  NEPHEW,  THE  WOLF. 

Mldac  ka'i'jipa'kaguzita'tiwat.  Mldac  ka'ijikabaciwat, 
mlsa'  kaga't  unisani  Ini/u  awaslyan.  Anlc  kawlnigu  piici- 
gwanunk  ayaslwag.  Paniigu  papamigusiwag.  Mldac  kaga't 
Ligitcimamrkawi'a'nini  ini/u  awaslyan.  Kaga't  mmo'a'ya. 


15  Ningutingigu  papamigusiwat,  acimawlngwaminit  Ini/u 
umicomayan.  'Al>a/u  ma'i'ngan  acinimiskamat,  "Intacka 
nlnltug  manapamigwan,"  udinan  'i^'i711  klciglnipanit. 


Mldac     ka'i'cikuskusinit,     cigwa     kaga't     uwmdamagon : 

"Kagatsa,  nintojim,  kigic'tcimanabamin.      Ambasano,  manu 

20  pisindawicin     ka/rmnan ;     manu     icictcigan    4t!i/u    kaininan. 

Klcpin  wlnontawisiwan  ciixwisa  kaininan,  kaga't  klga'i'niga- 

4ton   liGi/u  kiya/u.     Ambasano,   misawa'ku  ani'a'timat  was:a/u 


89 

told  by  the  old  (Wolf):  "One  of  my  sons  I  give  to  you," 
he  was  told. 

Now,  (Nanabushu)  uttered  assent  (while  the  old  Wolf 
spoke).  "This,  indeed,  will  be  the  source  from  which  I 
shall  obtain  good  sustenance.  Accordingly  from  this  place 
he  should  go  forth  (to  hunt),"  he  said  to  the  old  (Wolf). 

"Well,  it  is  on  the  morrow  that  we  will  move,"  he  was 
told  by  the  old  (Wolf). 

So  it  was  true  that  then  they  moved.  "I  am  leaving 
you  one  who  will  keep  you  supplied  with  food  throughout 
the  winter,"  he  was  told  by  the  old  (Wolf). 

And  it  was  true. 

10.  THE  DEATH  OF  NANABUSHU'S  NEPHEW,  THE  WoLF.1 

Thereupon  they  separated  from  one  another.  And  when 
(he  and  the  Wolf)  went  into  camp,  it  was  truly  (the  Wolf) 
that  killed  the  game.  Naturally  not  in  one  spot  they 
remained,  always  from  one  place  to  another  they  went. 
And  so  truly  was  (the  Wolf)  ever  killing  the  pick  of  game. 
Truly  was  he  living  well. 

Now,  once  while  they  were 'moving  about,  in  his  sleep 
was  (the  Wolf's)  uncle  weeping.  The  Wolf  indifferently 
signed  to  him  with  the  hand,  "I  fancy  that  probably  he 
may  be  having  a  bad  dream  about  me,"  he  said  of  him 
who  then  was  taking  his  nap. 

Thereupon  when  (Nanabushu)  woke,  then  truly  was  (the 
Wolf)  informed  by  him,  saying:  "Verily,  my  nephew,  have 
I  had  an  exceedingly  bad  dream  about  you.  I  beg  of 
you,  please  listen  to  what  I  shall  say  to  you ;  please  do 
what  I  tell  you.  If  you  have  no  desire  to  listen  to  what 
I  have  to  tell  you,  truly  then  will  you  do  yourself  an 
injury.  So  please,  even  if  it  be  when  you  are  overtaking 

1  For  other  versions  see  Nos.   31,  45. 


9o 

awasP,  manii  mi'tigons  klganabo'kubiton  misawa  pangins 
slblnsiwa'kamigak,  mldac  'i'l'ma11  kanra'pagitoyan  lii:i'u 
mi'tigons.  Mlsagu  'pana  katotaman." 

Anic  mlsa  gaga't  acictcigat  misawagu  cigwa  adimat. 
5  Anic  ningutingigu  piminicawat  mi/u  awasPyan  -  -  anlc  mlgu 
'pana  48i/u  acictcigat  kagatsa  clgatci.  Ningutingigu 

kani'u'ndciidacpiminicawat  Ini/u  monson  -  -  anlc  mlcigwa 
anawi  slgwaninig  -  -  mldac  anantank  8a*a'u  ma'rngan  pimi- 
nijawat  Ini/u  monzon,  kaga't  ki'tciunltcaniwan  Ini/u  pami- 

10  nicawat.  Mldac  cigwa  tababamat,  mlgu  4i8i/u  a'pitci  cigwa 
tabipinat,  ugiwabandan  pangPs  slbmsiwa'kamiganig. 
KPwan  krrnandam:  "Ambasano,  mlgu  iu  kanrijra/cawi- 
gwackwaniyan  ciKi'man  siblnsiwa'kamiganig."  Panagu  nawa- 
gam  kapangicink  si'i'nian  ki'tcisiblnk,  panagu  kasaswiinik 

15   u'tawagan. 


Misa7  papimusat  Nanabucu  acinica'i'ka'kawanit  lni/u 
utociman,  cigwa  unisito'kawa/a'n  kc^ki'a'nigubanan  ningu 
tingigu  anrrnabit,  panagu  ki'tcisibi  kabimi'tigwayanig. 
Mldac  acimawit  Nanabucu.  Mlnawa'ku  ningutci  anuwri'ca, 
20  a'panagu  pabamatamut.  Kagatsa  umindcinawasinan  Ini/u 
utociman.  Anlc  ugi'kantan  awlya  totagut.  Ka'ijimadcat 
msatciwan  4ci/u  sibi.  Anic  anibimatamu.  Mldac  ka'ijisa- 
gitawacagamat  48i/u  sibi,  mldac  i'i'man  owabaman  Ini/u 


game,  as  you  go  along  break  off  a  little  stick,  no  matter 
how  small  the  dry  bed  of  a  brook  may  be,  and  there 
shall  you  fling  the  little  stick.  That  is  what  you  should 
always  do." 

Accordingly  that  truly  was  what  he  did  whenever  he 
was  about  to  overtake  (the  game).  Now,  once  while  he 
was  in  pursuit  of  some  game,  -  -  for  that  was  what  he 
always  was  doing,  -  -  truly,  he  grew  tired  (of  throwing  a 
stick  into  the  dry  bed  of  brooks).  For  when  once  away 
from  a  certain  place  he  was  in  pursuit  of  a  moose,  - 
since  it  was  now  getting  well  on  towards  the  spring,  - 
this  was  the  feeling  of  the  Wolf  when  in  pursuit  of  the 
moose,  truly  a  big  cow  was  he  following  after.  And  then 
presently,  when  he  came  in  sight  of  her,  --  indeed,  when  he 
was  on  the  very  point  of  seizing  her,  -  he  saw  the  dry 
bed  of  a  small  brook.  They  say  (that  thus)  he  thought: 
"Well,  now,  (without  throwing  the  stick  ahead  of  me,)  I 
will  leap  right  on  across  the  dry  bed  of  this  brook." 
Then  straightway  down  into  the  middle  of  a  great  stream 
he  fell,  and  all  the  while  was  there  a  ringing  in  his  ears. 

And  now,  while  along  was  walking  Nanabushu  as  he 
followed  the  trail  of  his  nephew,  he  presently  noticed  by 
the  sign  of  the  tracks  that  (his  nephew)  was  pressing  close 
(upon  the  moose) ;  and  once  as  he  looked  while  going 
along,  there,  to  his  surprise,  was  a  great  river  flowing 
across  his  path.  Thereupon  wept  Nanabushu.  Then 
repeatedly  from  place  to  place  in  vain  he  went  (to  get 
across),  and  all  the  while  he  wept  as  he  wandered  about. 
Truly  sad  he  felt  for  his  nephew.  Now,  (Nanabushu) 
knew  that  by  somebody  was  he  (thus)  treated.  Afterwards 
he  started  down  the  course  of  the  river.  Now,  he  wept 
as  he  went.  And  now,  when  he  had  followed  the  course 
of  the  river  to  where  it  opened  out  (into  another  body 
of  water),  then  there  he  beheld  the  kingfisher  looking 


92 

uglckimanism  inabiwan  rrman  nibrkang.  Acinawatinat, 
mldac  ka'i'cipicigunat  uctigwanining  anuglna'U'tinat.  Midac 
ka/rgut  :  "Micanim  Nanabucu!  Niwiwindamawaban  win 
a11,"  ugri'gon. 

5        "Taga,   wlndamawicin,"  ugri'nan. 
Mldac  kaga't  ka'priji'rcanit. 

"Tagackuma,     wlndamawicin,     nicimisa,"    ugri  nan    ini/u 
uglckimanism.    O'o'widac  ugl  i'gon  :   "Aye8,  klgawmdamon. 
Km   mawin   Nanabucu,"   ugri'gon. 
10        "Kawm,"  ugri  -nan. 

Wo'o*  idac  ugrrgon  :  "Ka,  anica  Nanabucu  udociman 
klma'kama.  Mraf'*  ugimamiclpici,  mra/-u  kama'kamat  Ini/u 
Nanabucowan  udocimini.  O'o'widac  nintinandam,  magica 
kaya  mn  unagic  sagitciwapinigatanig.  Kaya  nln  nintinan- 
15  tarn  rrma11  kra'gosiyan,  mlgu*i'u  kanawabiyan  rrman 
kra'gosiyan." 

"Kao-atsa  awawa,  ambasano,  wawmdamawicin,"  um'i'nan 

o  '      •  •  o 

Ini/u  uglckimanism.      "Mackut  tcru'niciciyan   kiga'i'ci'i'n." 

Medac  kaga't  ka'i'cina'kumigut. 

20  Mldac  ka-rciwawacra/t  Ini/u  uglckimanism,  Ini/u  udona- 
manan  klwawacitcigagat.  Mldac  kiwawacra't  Ini/u  uglcki 
manism.  O'o'widac  ugri'gon  :  "Ambasano,  ayangwamisin, 
Nanabucu.  Kigawito'kawin  8H*U  kadicictcigayan,"  ugri'nan 


25        "Awawa,"  ugl'i-nan  wa8a/u  Nanabucu. 

"Nacka,   klgawawmtamon,"   ugri'gon  Ini/u  uglckimanisln. 

"Aye8,  kagalt  mlgiri'ma11  tcra'yayan  pacu'irma11  saga'i'gan 

sagitawa,"    ugi'i'gon  ;    "medac    i'i'ma11    nawagam    minisina- 

tawangak.       Midac    iman    andaci'kawat    klcigatinik    klcpin 

30  mica'kwatinik;  mlgu'i'11  acinibawat  ka'kina.     Mlgu  liu  kaba- 


93 

down  into  the  water.  He  made  a  grab  for  him,  but  he 
slipped  hold  of  him  at  the  head  when  he  tried  to  seize 
him.  And  this  was  what  he  was  told:  "Confound  Nana- 
bushu  !  I  meant  to  tell  him  something,"  he  was  told. 

"Pray,   do  tell   me,"  he  said  to  him. 

Thereupon  truly  hither  came  (the  Kingfisher). 

"Do  please  tell  me,  my  little  brother,"  he  said  to  the 
Kino-fisher.  So  this  he  was  told:  "Yes,  I  will  tell  you. 
But  you  must  be  Nanabushu,"  he  was  told. 

"No,"  he  said  to  him. 

So  this  he  was  told  :  "Ay,  without  reason  was  Nanabushu's 
nephew  taken  away  from  him.  It  was  the  chief  of  the  great 
lynxes,1  it  was  he  who  took  away  Nanabushu's  nephew. 
Now,  this  was  I  thinking :  'Perhaps  I  too  (shall  have  a  share 
of)  his  gut  when  it  is  thrown  out  (from  where  he  has  been 
taken  down).  I  too  wanted  it,  (that)  was  why  I  was  perched 
up  there,  and  watched  for  it  while  perched  up  there.'" 

"Truly,  then,  all  right!  Pray,  go  ahead  and  tell  me 
about  it,"  he  said  to  the  Kingfisher.  "In  return  I  will 
make  you  so  that  you  will  be  beautiful." 

Thereupon  he  truly  was  willing  to  do  what  he  was  asked. 

Thereupon,  when  he  painted  the  Kingfisher,  it  was  his 
paint  that  he  had  used.  And  so  he  painted  the  Kingfisher. 
Now,  this  he  was  told:  "Pray,  take  pains,  Nanabushu; 
for  I  will  help  you  in  what  you  do,"  (thus)  to  him  said 
the  Kingfisher. 

"All  right,"  to  him  said  Nanabushu. 

"Listen!  I  will  now  tell  you,"  he  was  told  by  the  King 
fisher.  "Yea,  truly,  there  at  the  place  where  I  stay,  close 
to  where  (the  river)  flows  out  upon  this  lake,"  he  was 
told;  "and  so  out  there  upon  the  water  is  an  island  of 
sand.  It  is  there  they  amuse  themselves  by  day  when 
the  sky  is  clear  •,  and  there  they  all  sleep.  And  so  all 

1   Chief  of  the  great  lynxes,  the  great  water-monster  of  the  sea,  lakes,  and  rivers. 


94 

gijik  aciglciginibawat.  Medac  iiman  tciwabamat  'a^a'11 
ka'irda'pinat  Ini/u  kitociman.  Pama  ickwatc  agwalta 
mri'ma11  o-alkina  agwa'tawat  Igi/u  manito^.  Midac  liei'man 

o  •  o  o  •  o 

a'pitcmawaya'r  cingicing  'asau  ka'irta'pinat  Ini/u  kitociman. 
5  Wabickisi  minangwana  a11  klga'i'nandam  a'pl  mockamut. 
Mldac  i'i-ma11  nawaya*r  tcinibat.  Nax,  misa  aciwlntamonan. 
Anlc  mlgu'i'ma11  katanisiyan  i'i'ma11  tciayayan.  Usam 
kaga't  kigrtabi  ka'i-ci'i'yan.  *Pi/u  kri'ci'i-yan  idac  ka'U'n- 
dciagawatansiwan  liu  kamldciyan." 


10  Kaga't  ugawanipaci'a  n  ini/u  kigocansan  lasa/u  ugicki- 
manisi ;  anic  an  i' tins  an  kimina  'aca/u  uklckimanisi.  Miclac 
a'pidci  kiwawlcantam. 

Cigwasa    kaga't   Nanabucu  kisagitawacigama  lifii/u  saga- 
'i'gan.     Mldac  ka-rnandank  tcimica'kwatinik.     Mldac  kaga't 

15  ka'i'cimica'kwatinik.  Ka*i'ji*u*jigabawit  tcigigicap  tcibwa- 
mo'ka'a'minit  klzison,  anic  manisisag  kra'wi ;  rrman  tclgibig 
kipada'kisut.  Mldac  Ii8i/u  wlnag  kawm  kri'cinagusinini, 
misa7  acigwinawicictcigat,  anic  inasamigabawi  iwiti  nibrkang. 
"Amn  ka-i'cictcigayan?"  kl'i'nandam  'isi/u  wlnag  tcri'cina- 

20  gusininig.  "Anlc,  ningawati'kwani11/'  Medac  ka/rcibwa- 
nawi'tot  mldac  ka'i'ci'a'nonat  lni/u  uglckimanesin  tcimldci- 
taminit.  Midac  kaga't  ka'i'cimldcitaminit,  mlgu  a'pana 
ponlnit  i'i'ma"  winagank.  Midac  kaga't  ka'i'cinisi'tawina- 


& 
gfusininik  i'i'u  ka'i'nackitcitaminit. 

o  • 


25  Cigwa  kaga't  owabandan  mamatcltciwaninig.  Cigwa 
owabama  mockamunit  awiya  anotc  awlya  mockam65; ;  mlgu 
pimra-gwa'tanit  ima"  minisinatawanganik.  Migu  a'pana 


95 

day  long  they  nap.  And  so  there  will  you  see  the  one 
that  seized  your  nephew.  Not  till  the  last  does  he  come 
forth  out  of  the  water  to  where  have  come  all  the  manitous. 
And  then  there  in  the  very  centre  lies  the  one  that  seized 
your  nephew.  He  is  white,  and  therefore  by  that  sign 
will  you  know  when  he  comes  up  to  the  surface.  And 
there  in  the  middle  will  he  sleep.  There,  that  is  all  I 
have  to  tell  you.  Now,  therefore,  there  will  I  be  present 
where  you  are.  Ever  so  proud,  truly,  am  I  of  what  you 
have  done  for  me.  That  you  did  so  to  me  is  why  I  shall 
not  lack  for  what  I  shall  eat." 

Truly,  always  with  ease  will  the  Kingfisher  obtain  the 
little  fishes  ;  for  with  tiny  spears  was  the  Kingfisher  provided. 
Accordingly  very  pleased  was  he  with  the  gift. 

Then  truly  Nanabushu  followed  the  stream  to  where  it 
opened  out  on  the  lake.  Thereupon  he  willed  that  there 
should  be  a  clear  day.  Whereupon  truly  there  was  a 
clear  day.  After  he  had  found  a  place  to  stand  very 
early  in  the  morning  before  the  sun  was  yet  up,  then 
into  a  dead  pine  stump  he  changed ;  there  by  the  edge 
of  the  water  he  stood.  But  yet  his  penis  did  not  change 
its  form,  whereupon  he  was  at  a  loss  to  know  what  to 
do,  for  as  he  stood  he  faced  the  water.  "What  shall  I 
do  ?"  He  desired  that  his  penis  should  not  look  that  way. 
"Well,  I  will  have  a  branch  (there)."  And  when  he  was 
unable  to  produce  it,  he  then  had  the  Kingfisher  mute 
upon  it.  And  then,  truly,  after  he  had  muted  upon  it, 
then  continually  lit  he  there  upon  the  penis.  Whereupon 
it  truly  could  not  be  recognized  from  its  appearance,  by 
reason  of  (the  Kingfisher)  having  muted  upon  it. 

In  time  he  truly  beheld  the  water  setting  up  a  ripple. 
Presently  he  saw  a  creature  come  to  the  surface,  then  all 
kinds  of  beings  began  to  rise  upon  the  water ;  and  then 
hither  came  they  forth  from  out  of  the  water  upon  the 


96 

agwa'tanit    rru    manitoc,  anotc  acinagusinit.      "Mldac  awa- 
niban,"  inandam. 

Anlc  mlgu-rma"  agosinit  mi/u  ugickimanisin.      "Ml  cigvva 
kaga,"  udigon;    "tcimockamut,"  udigon.     "Mamawi  ickwatc 
5   tamockamu,"  udigon. 

Mldac  kaga't  acinawat  'ix-i'u  manitofi.  Mlgu  aninibanit 
iman  minisinatawangank.  Wl'kagu  awaniban  awlya  kamoc- 
kamunit.  "Mlsa/  ca'ta*a>u,  Nanabucu,  kamockamut  wa!:a/u 
wawabamat." 


10        Ningutinigu  ca'i'gwa  ki'tcimadcitciwanini  rru  saga*i-gan. 

"Mlcigwa !"  udigon  lni/u  ugickimanisin. 

Cavig^wa    kaea't    inabit    ri'witi  nawaram   untcimockamo- 

J      O  O  •  O 

wan,  kaga'tsa  uniciciwan.    Cigwa  madwaglgitowan  :  "Nana 
bucu   awati  kanibawit,"   madwa-i^kitowan. 


15  O'O'widac  madwa/r'kitowan  mi/u  pajig :  "Anm  kagicina- 
gwa'k  kayawit  caca/u  Nanabucu?"  madwa*r(kitowan  ini/u 
pajik. 

Mldac  ka-i-'kitut  mlnawa  pajik:  "Madclnata'i'jimanitowi." 

O'o'widac  kri>lkito  awati  agumut:  "Kawln  wlgwra*patasl. 
20  Taga,   kinabi'k,   awititibana'kwa8." 


Kaga't  kipitotawan  ka'i'cititbana'kwa'U'gut.  Kwratcigucku 
"Yo!"  tcri'kitut  ka'i'ci-a-bisku'tanit.  "Anln  kaglcinagwa'k 
Nanabucu  kayawit  ?"  kl'i-'kitowan. 


97 

sandy  island.  Then  in  a  multitude  out  of  the  water  came 
the  manitous,  of  every  kind  that  were,  and  the  way  they 
looked.  "But  he  is  not  there,"  he  thought. 

Now,  up  yonder  was  perched  the  Kingfisher.  "It  is 
nearly  time,"  (Nanabushu)  was  told,  "for  him  to  come  to 
the  surface,"  he  was  told.  "Of*  them  all,  he  will  be  the 
last  to  appear,"  he  was  told. 

And  so  they  truly  seemed  to  him  like  the  manitous. 
And  as  they  came,  they  went  to  sleep  there  upon  the 
sandy  island.  It  was  a  long  while  before  the  absent  one 
came  up  to  the  surface.  "Now,  that  is  the  only  one, 
Nanabushu,  yet  to  appear,  (the  one)  that  you  have  been 
wanting  to  see." 

Now,  at  times  the  water  moved  in  great  ripples  about 
over  the  lake. 

"Now,  then!"  he  was  told  by  the  Kingfisher. 

Now,  truly,  as  he  looked  out  there  upon  the  water  from 
which  the  creature  was  coming  forth,  truly  beautiful  was 
the  being.  Presently  the  voice  of  him  was  heard  saying: 
"It  is  Nanabushu  that  stands  yonder,"  the  voice  of  him 
was  heard  saying. 

And  this  one  of  them  was  heard  saying:  "How  could 
Nanabushu  be  changed  to  look  like  that?"  one  of  them 

£> 

was  heard  saying. 

And  this  was  what  another  said :  "  He  is  without  the 
power  of  being  a  manitou  to  that  extent." 

And  this  said  the  one  yonder,  who  was  yet  in  the 
water:  "He  does  not  want  to  come.  Go,  Snake,  (and)  coil 
around  him." 

Truly  (by  the  Snake)  that  came  crawling  was  (Nanabushu) 
then  coiled  round  about.  Just  as  he  was  on  the  point 
of  saying  "Yo!"  then  (the  Snake)  uncoiled.  "How  is  it 
possible  for  Nanabushu  to  take  on  such  a  form?"  said 
(the  Snake). 

7 — PUBL.    AMER.    ETHN.    SOC.    VOL.    VII. 


98 

Midac  minawa  ka/r'kitut  awati :  "Ambasano,  kin  krtci- 
ma'kwa,  awiba^pasagobic,"  ugrrnan. 

Midac  kaga't  ka'picra/gwa'tanit  Ini/u  ki^tcima^kwan  ka'i*- 
cipa^pasagubinigut.  Kwatcigu^ku'  "Yd!"  tcri*lkitut  acipo- 
5  nri'gut.  "Anin  kaglcinagwa'k  Nanabucu  kayawit?"  ki'i- 
'kitowan. 

"Kawln,  iTiisagu  'i^i711  Nanabucu  ka'i'cinagirirt."  Midac 
sibiskatc  ka'picinatagumunit,  a'pidcinawaya'i'  icigawici- 
mowan. 

10  "Wi'kagasa  a'pidci  tabosangwaci,"  kri'nandam  w^a'a11 
Nanabucu.  Mlsa  wi'kawa'a't  tcinibanit,  misa  kawln  niba- 
slwan  pinic  kalkina  nabanit.  O'5'widac  ogri'gon  lni/u 
ugickimanisin  :  "  Kigawmtamon  a'pi  nibat,"  udigon  lni/u 
uglckimanisln.  "Mimawin  cigwa  kinibat.  lAla/u,  Nana- 

15  bucu,  amba,  awipimi/!  Nanabucu,  kagu  win  wiyawing 
pimwa'kan.  Kawln  potc  kitanisas!  rrma11  wiyawink  anu- 
pimwat,  Miya^ta  iiman  mazinatacink  mri'ma11  tcimisat 
ijipimwat,"  utigon  Ini/u  ugickimanisin. 


Midac    cigwa  animadcat  nasi'kawat.      Cigwasa  utotisan ; 

20  anlcipa'pacitawat  un'o<u  cankicininit.  Amc  krrnantam 
tcaposangwaminit.  Midac  cigwa  krirdisat,  anic  kaga't 
cigwa  uglkwatackwawan  mi/u  mi'tigwabin,  midac  cigwa 
wi'pimwat.  Anic  waca'pmit  udicipimwan,  kagatclskatwa- 
wayanga*a*t.  Minawa  pangigu  pimaya'i1  aniri'na'a*,  misa7 

25   minawa    kagatclckatwawayanga'a't    liei/u    ubigwa'k.      "Icta, 


And  this  again  was  what  the  one  yonder  said:  "I  beg 
of  you,  Great  Bear,  do  go  (and)  claw  him,"  he  said  to  him. 

Whereupon  truly  out  of  the  water  came  the  Great  Bear 
by  whom  (Nanabushu)  was  clawed.  Just  as  he  was  about 
to  say  "Yo!"  he  was  let  alone  by  it.  "How  is  it  possible 
for  Nanabushu  to  be  changed  to  such  a  form?"  said  (the  Bear). 

"Nay,  but  into  such  a  form  has  Nanabushu  changed 
himself."  Then  cautiously  over  the  water  to  where  the 
others  were,  came  the  being;  in  their  very  midst  was  where 
he  lay  down. 

"Would  that  he  might  go  soundly  to  sleep!"  thought 
Nanabushu.  Whereupon  he  waited  for  him  to  go  to  sleep, 
but  the  other  would  not  go  to  sleep  till  all  (the  rest)  were 
asleep.  Then  this  was  he  told  by  the  Kingfisher:  "I  will 
tell  you  when  he  is  asleep,"  he  was  told  by  the  Kingfisher. 
"No  doubt  he  is  now  asleep.  Now,  then,  Nanabushu, 
come,  go  shoot  him !  Nanabushu,  don't  you  shoot  him  in 
the  body.  It  is  impossible  for  you  to  kill  him  if  you  try 
to  shoot  him  there  in  the  body.  Only  there  where  he 
casts  a  shadow  l  is  where  you  will  kill  him  when  you 
shoot  him,"  he  was  told  by  the  Kingfisher. 

Thereupon  now  on  his  way  he  started  to  go  to  him.  In 
a  while  (Nanabushu)  came  to  where  (the  manitou)  was ;  as 
he  went,  he  stepped  over  them  that  were  lying  there.  Now, 
he  was  sure  that  they  were  all  sound  asleep.  And  when 
he  got  to  where  (the  being)  was,  then  truly  he  strung  his 
bow,  whereupon  he  then  aimed  to  shoot  (the  being).  Now, 
in  his  side  was  where  he  shot  him;  he  heard  the  sound  of 
(his  weapon)  when  it  hit  him.  Another  time  in  a  slightly 
different  place  he  tried  to  shoot  with  his  arrow,  and  so 
again  he  heard  the  sound  of  his  arrow  when  it  struck. 
"Ah,  this  was  the  way  my  little  brother  told  me:  'There 

1  Shadow  and  soul  are  closely  connected.  The  soul  of  a  person  is  his  life: 
hence  to  kill  the  soul  is  to  kill  life. 


IOO 

ml'ta  win  ka'rcit  nicimisa  rrwiti  agawa'tacink  icipimu' 
ningrr'k."  Midac  kaga't  iima11  waskaningwlcininit  aci- 
pimwat. 

"  Micanlm    Nanabucu !      Nax,    mra*11    Nanabucu   nindanu- 
5    'i^kitunaban.      Mlgu  iu  nicit  kanabatc." 

Mlsa7,  acimadclba'rwat,  mlsa/  nipi  uno4pinanigun.  Ani- 
nantaganimusik  nantupatwadank  ningutci  tciwatciwaninig ; 
wrkagu  umi'kan.  Ackamigu  a'ku'kitcipisut  a'kwa'a-m  ri*u 
nipi.  "Mlmawln  ni'kibig  wo'O'  alki,"  kri'andam.  Anlc 
10  micigwa  klta'kwamatciwat  i'i<u  wadci/u,  mlgu  kayabi  klmo- 
cka*a*ninig.  Ka'i'cia^kwantawat,  kagagu  abi'tawa'tig  srru 
mi'tigon  mi'i'u  ka'a-'kumocka'a-ninig ;  medac  ka'i'cinogick- 
anig.  Midac  ka'i'ciskablnig ;  medac  ka/rciskabig  i'i<u  nipi, 
mldacka-i'cinlsantawat. 


1 1 .   NANABUSHU  BREAKS  THE  NECKS  OF  THE  DANCING  GKKSE. 

15  Mlsax  cigwa  minawa  kl'pabamatisit  wo'O'  alki.  Ningu- 
tingigu  pabamusat  oglwabandan  saga'i'gan ;  oglwabama 
awlya  tacfkanit.  "  Awagwanagigic  ?"  kri*nandam.  Medac 
ka-rcinasi'kawat  i'i'ma11  tacl'kanit,  kuniginin  4ci/u  ni'ka ! 
"Amantcigic  katotawawagwan  ?"  kri'nandam.  Cigwa  ugl- 

20  milkwantan  i'i'u  kacictcigat.  "Taga,  wa-o*  ninga'i'nag," 
kl-i'nandani.  "'Ambasano,  kiganlmrrninim'  ninga'i'nag," 
kl'i-nandam.  Midac  acikupipa'tod  ri*u  saga'i'gan;  kawli- 
cikacklginat  clngubl8  rrma11  u'kunacicink,  mldac  acimada- 
ta\vangusat. 


101 

where  he  casts  a  shadow  is  where  you  shall  shoot  him,' 
I  was  told."  And  so  truly  there  into  the  side  of  his 
shadow  was  where  he  shot  him. 

"Confound  Nanabushu!  There,  that  it  was  Nanabushu 
I  said,  but  to  no  purpose.  And  now  perhaps  he  has 
slain  me." 

And  now,  as  (Nanabushu)  started  in  flight,  then  by  the 
water  was  he  pursued.  With  all  his  might  he  ran,  seeking 
for  a  place  where  there  might  be  a  mountain  ;  he  was  a 
long  while  finding  it.  And  above  his  girdle  was  he  wading 
in  the  water.  "No  doubt  but  that  this  earth  is  wholly 
under  water,"  he  thought.  Now,  while  he  was  on  his  way 
up  the  mountain,  still  yet  was  it  overflowing.  When  he 
had  climbed  (a  tree),  then  nearly  halfway  up  the  trees 
was  how  far  the  water  had  risen ;  and  then  was  when 
the  water  ceased  rising.  And  then  afterwards  the  water 
receded ;  and  when  the  water  receded,  then  down  from 
the  tree  he  descended. 

ii.   NANABUSHU  BREAKS  THE  NECKS  OF  THE  DANCING  GEESE. l 

And  so  again  he  went  travelling  about  over  this  earth. 
Now,  once  while  he  was  walking  about,  he  saw  a  lake ; 
he  saw  some  creatures  moving  about  there.  "  Wonder 
who  they  are!"  he  thought.  And  so,  when  he  went  over 
to  the  place  where  they  were  busied,  lo,  they  were  geese ! 
"Wonder  how  I  shall  do  to  get  at  them!"  he  thought. 
Presently  he  discovered  what  he  would  do.  "I  say,  this 
will  I  tell  them,"  he  thought.  "'Please  let  me  make  you 
dance,'  I  will  say  to  them,"  he  thought.  And  then  he 
ran  up  from  the  lake ;  after  he  had  been  off  gathering 
balsam-boughs  in  his  old  soiled  blanket,  then  out  upon 
the  beach  he  went  walking. 

1  For  other  versions  see  Nos.   20  and  48. 


1O2 


"Oi,      Nanabucu     awati !        Kawm     klgabasamigusiwa ! 
Niminawa'O'yu'k !"  inawag  Igi/u  ni'ka^sag. 

Cigwasa  owabama  Nanabucu,  "Namantc  winrr11  kito- 
tawak  ningutci  wa/a'bammagogun !  Kaga/tagu  ningitcrr- 
5  nigawagantam.  Nackagimn  ana'kamiga'k  o'o'witi  wantu- 
sayan.  Kaga't  rninawanigusiwag,  ki'tcipapa'pina'kamigisi- 
wag  o-o'witi  wantusayan.  Atatana,  ki'tcinanimi'i'tiwag ! 
Nacka,  o'O'ma11  picayu'k." 

Anic  kaga't  pri'cawa8. 

10  "  Nicimisatug,  nlmi'i'tiwin  nimplton.  Misagu  ono/u  naga- 
munan  ka'i'ciwanayan.  Nackasagu  kigammi'i'ninim.  Uci- 
'toyu'k  i'i'man  kitacinimi'i'nagu'k." 

Anic    kaga/t    agwa'tawag    lgi/u    ni'kansag,    midac    cigwa 
ujiltowat    'i'i'ina11  watacinimi'i'ntwa.      Anic   ugMdncra'mawa, 
15   lisi/u  ka'irci'tonit.      Aba'pic  ka'kicitdnit. 

"Anic  misa  cigwa  tciblndigayag."  Mlsa/  iicimockinanit. 
Aba'pic  ka'kino'a'mawat  ka'i'cictciganit.  "Migii  i!:i/u  kiini- 
•i'na'a'man  kani'a'rntotamag;  mri/<u  ka'i'citcigayag.  Nacka, 
kiga'ki'kino-a'monininim  lici/u  kani'rna'a'man,  mlgu  <<:i/u 
20  kani-a'rntotamag,"  udina  i'i<u  nilkansa8.  "Anm  win  kiici- 
pabami^tawiyag  usam  tci'kinclisoyan,  ningapasigwlwinigu. 
Mlgu'ku  iu  katatotaman  i'i'u  tca'kintisoyanin.  Anic  misa7 
mlgu  lisi/u  tcibabatacicimoyan,  ri*u  tcitcfkindisoyan  tciba- 
bananlrniyan  anigu'k." 


25  Anic  misa  cigwa  madcinimra't  i'i*u  nilkansa.  Kiigatsa 
udcrkima{:  mmi'a't.  "Anic,  mlmawln  cigwa  tciwlnisagwa," 
inantam.  Midac  ajinagamut : 


103 

"  Hey,  (there  is)  Nanabushu  yonder !  He  will  not  refrain 
from  saying  something  to  you  !  Swim  out  into  the  lake !" 
the  goslings  were  told. 

When  Nanabushu  saw  them,  "Wonder  why  you  act  so 
whenever  I  see  you  anywhere !  Truly  hurt  am  I  over 
my  disappointment.  Learn  what  is  going  on  over  here 
from  whence  I  come.  Truly,  a  fine  time  are  they  having, 
in  a  highly  delightful  manner  are  they  enjoying  themselves 
over  here  from  whence  I  come.  Oh,  my !  but  what  a  great 
time  they  always  have  dancing!  Hark!  Come  you  hither." 

Now,   truly,   hither  they  came. 

"O  my  little  brothers!  a  dance  have  I  fetched  (to  you). 
Now,  these  are  (all)  songs  that  I  have  upon  my  back. 
So  therefore  I  am  going  to  have  you  dance.  Arrange 
you  there  a  place  where  I  am  to  have  you  dance." 

And  so  truly  out  of  the  water  came  the  goslings,  where 
upon  they  now  began  making  a  place  where  they  would 
be  made  to  dance.  Now,  he  taught  them  how  to  make  it. 
In  time  they  had  it  finished. 

"Now  it  is  time  for  you  to  enter  in."  Wrhereupon  they 
filled  (the  place)  full.  In  due  time  he  taught  them  what  they 
should  do.  "Now,  the  way  that  1  shall  sing  is  the  way 
that  you  should  do  ;  such  is  the  way  you  are  to  act.  Now, 
listen !  I  will  teach  you  what  I  shall  sing,  and  that  is  what 
you  are  to  do,"  he  said  to  the  goslings.  "You  shall  pay 
no  heed  to  me  when  I  become  overwrought  with  excite 
ment,  for  I  shall  be  leaping  to  my  feet.  That  is  what  I 
shall  be  doing  when  I  get  to  feeling  good.  Now,  that  is 
the  very  way  I  shall  move  about  in  the  dance,  because  I 
shall  be  so  happy  when  I  am  moving  about  dancing." 

Well,  it  was  now  that  he  began  to  make  the  goslings 
dance.  Truly  happy  he  made  them  when  he  had  them 
dancing.  "Well,  perhaps  now  is  the  time  for  me  to  kill 
them,"  he  thought.  And  so  he  sang  : 


104 

"Nabanakatacimuwin  nimbiton,  nicimisitug !" 

Anic  mlgu  gaga't  nabanagatacimuwat  igi/L1  ni'ka^ag. 
Anic  udci'kimiguwan. 

Ningutingigu  mlnawa  madcra*minit,  cro'widac  ina'a'mon : 

5  "Toskabicimowin  nimpiton  nicimisitug!" 

Midacigu  antotaminit  i'i*u  nikansae. 

"Ocrkutawin  a'pi  i'i-u  ina'a-man,  klcpin  awiya  toskabit 
tamiskuskicingwa,"  ugl*i-na8.  Caylgwa  madcra/m  : 

"Pasangwa  picimowin  nimpiton,  nicimisitug!" 
10        Anlc  migu  gaga't  acipasangwabiwat  Igi/u  nilkansag. 

Caylgwa  mlnawa  udanra/ntciwintan  yi'i'u  nagamun  : 

"Ayantaso  ni'kiwiyag  ayansigwacimoyu'k, 
Nicimisitug,  nicimisitug !" 

Anic  mlgu  kaga't  antotamuwat  Igi/u  ni'kansag,  intigu 
i  ^  kro*yu4kupinawag  acicimuwat. 

Anlc  midac  i'i'ma11  kri'nat :  "Mrrman  a'pi  kapasigwiyan 
kayamn  tcipabanlmiyan,"  ugi'i'na8.  Midac  kaga't  klpasi- 
gwit,  mlgu  aninitamickawat  ansigwacimunit  acipo'kugwa- 
binat.  Anlc  mlgu  pa'kic  nagamut  pimipo'kugwabinat. 


20  Ickwantang  win  mank  aTntacicimu.  Kagatsa  wawisa- 
gickagon  awiya.  "Aninta?"  inantam  *ai:a/u  mank.  "Taga 
pina  ningatoskab,"  inantam.  "Untikwanantagu  obo'ku- 
gwabina  o'<r  naminit,"  inantam  lasa/u  mank.  Acitoskabit, 
kuniginln  kaga't  na'i'ta  inabit  upimipo'kugwabinani.  O'6'man 


105 

"A  dance  on  one  leg  do  I  fetch,  O  my  little  brothers!" 

So  then  truly  on  one  leg  danced  the  goslings.  Now 
happy  were  they  made  by  him. 

Now,  another  time  as  he  started  singing,  this  was  the 
song  he  sang : 

"A  dance  with  the  eyes  nearly  closed  do  I  fetch,  O  my  little  brothers!" 

Now,  that  was  what  the  goslings  did. 

"Now,    when    in    this    manner    I    begin    to    sing,    if  one 

•  DO' 

opens  one's  eyes  to  look,  then  will  one  become  red  in  the 
eye,"   he  said  to  them.      Now  he  began  singing : 

"A  dance  with  the  eyes  closed  do  I  fetch,  O  my  little  brothers!" 

So  then  truly  did  the  goslings  close  their  eyes  (as  they 
danced). 

Now  again  he  changed  his  song  as  he  sang : 

"As  many  geese  as  there  are  of  you,  swarm  you  with  necks  together, 
O  my  little  brothers,  O  my  little  brothers!" 

Now,  that  truly  was  what  the  goslings  did :  as  expected, 
they  bunched  together  when  they  danced. 

So  it  was  at  this  point  that  he  said  to  them:  "Now  is 
the  time  for  me  to  rise  and  move  about  in  the  dance," 
he  said  to  them.  And  so  truly  up  he  rose,  whereupon, 
as  he  came  to  them  dancing  with  their  necks  together,  he 
broke  their  necks.  Now  he  sang  at  the  same  time  that 
he  moved  among  them  breaking  their  necks. 

By  the  doorway  was  yonder  Loon  dancing.  Truly  was 
he  hurt  when  jostled  by  some  one  bumping  against  him. 
"What  is  the  matter?"  thought  the  Loon.  "I  think  I  had 
better  open  my  eyes  and  see,"  he  thought.  "It  is  seemingly 
probable  that  he  is  breaking  the  necks  of  these  who  are 
dancing,"  thought  the  Loon.  When  he  opened  his  eyes 
to  look,  lo,  it  truly  was  in  time  to  see  that  (Nanabushu) 


io6 

antacicimut  !ni/u  kawawisagickagut,  mmangwana  kawinanit. 
Ajisagitcikwaskwanit.  "Mimawln  tcitaba'kupipa'rwayam- 
ban,"  inantam  aciplgagit  'asa/u  mank.  " Aba'pinisiwagan, 
Nanabucu  kidickwanigunan  !"  i'kito  'a^a'11  mank. 


5  "Nicanim!"  omadwa-i'gon  nasibiba*i-wat.  Cigwa  pacwa- 
witamon,  mri'u  cigwa  anubacwabandank  i'rma11  a'kunibl- 
lkanig ;  migu'  ba'kubipa-i'wat,  intagagimn  pl'tcibagwani. 
Mldac  i'i'man  kltangickagut  uciganang,  mldac  ka'i'cica- 
kackicikanawapickagut.  Mldac  ka'u'ndcrixinagusit  laea/u 
10  mank. 


Anlc  misa  cigwa  Nanabucu  wikiciswat  ri<u  unitkansimai;. 
Aciki'tcipotawat,  mldac  anlciningwa'a'bawat  lit:i/u  unilkiin- 
sima8.  Mldac  kanicisagisitacimat.  "Kaga'tsa  ninki'tciwi- 
niba,"  i'kito  Nanabucu.  "Ambasano,  ninganiba,"  ki'i*'kito. 
15  Mldac  H/>u  utclt  ka'i'tank  :  "Ambasano,  alkawabam  piwitag 
tcisagwa'O'wat,"  ugi'i'tan  4ci/u  utclt. 


Misa'  ka'i'cinibat,  misax  ka'i'citcangitiyanit ;  sagra't  'i'i7'11 
unikansima8.   Anlc  pimickawat  igi/u  anicinabag  Nanabucowan 
kitcankitiya'kisowan.       "  Nanabucu     owiiti.       Kago    mawin 
20  uglni'tonatug,"  i'kitowag  Igi/u  anicinabag. 


Anlc,    cigwa    laca/u    ka'kanawanta'i'nt    la!:a/u    miskwasap 
cigwa     gaga't    owabama    sagawa'O'nit    piwita8.       "Piwitag 
!"  i'kito   caca/u  miskwasap. 


was  busily  breaking  the  necks  (of  the  goslings).  Here 
where  he  was  dancing,  by  one  was  he  hurt  when  jostled, 
it  was  by  one  that  was  flopping  around.  Then  out  of 
doors  leaped  (the  Loon).  "Perhaps  there  is  just  time  for 
me  to  flee  to  the  water,"  he  thought.  Then  with  a  loud 
voice  cried  the  Loon:  "Look  out!  by  Nanabushu  are  we 
being  slain  !"  said  the  Loon. 

"Wretch!"  he  heard  (Nanabushu)  say  to  him  as  he  fled 
for  the  water.  Now,  near  was  heard  the  voice  (of  Nana 
bushu),  whereupon  then  he  tried  to  reach  the  place  where 
the  water  met  the  land ;  whereupon  he  reached  the  water 
in  his  flight,  but  alas!  far  away  out  was  it  yet  shallow.  And 
so  he  was  kicked  upon  the  small  of  the  back,  whereupon 
he  got  a  flat  curve  in  the  back  by  the  kick  he  received. 
And  such  was  how  the  Loon  came  to  look  that  way. 

So  it  was  now  that  Nanabushu  desired  to  cook  his 
goslings.  When  he  made  a  great  fire,  he  then  baked 
his  goslings  under  (a  bed  of  live-coals).  And  after  he 
had  laid  them  so  that  their  feet  were  sticking  out,  then, 
"Truly  very  anxious  am  I  for  a  long  sleep,"  said  Nana 
bushu.  "Well,  I  am  going  to  sleep,"  he  said.  Accordingly, 
then  to  his  bottom  he  said:  "Pray,  do  you  watch  for  any 
visitors  that  might  be  coming  into  view  round  the  point," 
he  said  to  his  bottom. 

And  so  when  he  went  to  sleep,  he  then  lay  with  the 
bottom  projecting  upward  •  for  he  was  selfish  of  his  goslings. 
Now,  by  canoe  were  travelling  some  people  (who  saw) 
Nanabushu  reclining  with  the  bottom  projecting  upward. 
"(There  is)  Nanabushu  yonder.  Something  perhaps  he 
may  have  killed,"  said  the  people. 

Well,  presently  the  bottom  that  was  watching  for  him 
now  truly  saw  some  strangers  coming  into  view  round  the 
point.  "Strangers  are  coming  round  the  point!"  said  the 
bottom. 


io8 
Aciwaniskapa'tod  Nanabucu,   anic  awaniban  kawabamat. 

"A'pana  ka-a'cata'a-muwat,"  i'kito   lat:a/u   mickwasap. 
Mldac  mlnawa  acitcangitiyakisut. 

"Mlmawm  cigwa  kinibagwan,"  i'kitowag  Igi/u  anicinabag. 
5    "Mlmawin    kinibagwan,"  i'kitowag.      "Taga,   mlnawa  saga- 
waota."     Acisagawa'O'wat,   mlnawa  aci-a'ca'ta'a-muwat. 

Cigwa   minawa  uganonigon  iyutclt :    "Plwitag  sagawa'a'- 
mog."      Mlgu    iu    anigucktisit    Nanabucu.      Minawa    kigito- 
wan     ini/u     utcitin :     "Pana    kacata'a'muwat,"    utigon    Ini/u 
10  utcitin. 

"Micanim  !"  utitan  i'i>u  utclt.  Acipa'pasagupitot  •  panim- 
agu  kakackipitot  mri-u  klponiltot. 

"Kaga'tigu  kawm  ba'pic  minawa  nintawlntamawasi," 
tidinanimigun  rru  utclt. 

15  Minawa  acisagawa'O'wat  Igi/l1  anicinabag.  "Mldac  i'i<u 
kinibat,"  i'kitowag.  '"A'a/u,  taga,  awri'nabiwata6.  Kago 
kuca  ugini'tonatug."  Mldac  kaga't  acikabawat,  kagalt 
opotawanini  kra'yani.  Mldac  acikimodimawat  ka'kina  4!:i/u 
uni4kansimini.  Anic  kickisitabinawat,  anicisagisitowat  iiman 

20  kanondcimo^awawat  i*i>u  ni'kansa8. 


Cigwa  kuskusi  Nanabucu.  "E^  nindonsamingwam  ! 
Mlmawln  usamisuwagwan  Igi/u  nini'ka^simag.  Tagataga 
skumakuta."  Ani'i'ciwlkubitot  i'i<u  usidansini,  migu  acina- 
ni'kibitot.  "Nax,  mlsa  kaga't  usamisowat  nini'kansimag." 
25  Mlnawa  pacig  utanuwi'kubiton,  mlgayabi  aci'u'ndcipitot. 
"Mlsa  gaga't  usamisuwat  Igi/u  nini'kansimag."  Mldac 


Up  leaped  Nanabushu  from  where  he  lay,  but  there 
was  no  one  for  him  to  see. 

"Straightway  back  have  they  turned,"   said  the  bottom. 

And  so  again  he  lay  with  his  bottom  projecting  upward. 

"Perhaps  now  he  may  be  asleep,"  said  the  people. 
"Perhaps  he  may  be  asleep,"  they  said.  "Pray,  let  us 
again  go  round  the  point."  They  then  went  round  the 
point,  but  again  they  withdrew. 

Now,  again  he  was  addressed  by  his  bottom  saying : 
"Strangers  are  coming  round  the  point."  Whereupon  then 
up  rose  Nanabushu  from  where  he  lay.  Again  spoke  his 
bottom,  saying:  "Forthwith  out  of  sight  they  withdrew," 
he  was  told  by  his  bottom. 

"Wretch!"  he  said  to  his  bottom.  Then  vigorously  he 
scratched  it ;  and  not  till  he  had  scratched  it  so  hard  that 
it  bled  did  he  then  let  it  alone. 

"Surely,  not  another  time  would  I  warn  him,"  was  the 
thought  entertained  of  him  by  his  bottom. 

Then  again  round  the  point  into  view  came  the  people. 
"He  has  now  gone  to  sleep,"  they  said.  "Now,  then,  I 
say,  let  us  go  (and)  look.  Something  surely  must  he  have 
killed."  And  then,  in  truth,  when  they  went  ashore,  sure 
enough,  there  was  his  fire.  Thereupon  they  robbed  him 
of  all  his  goslings.  So,  breaking  off  the  legs  (of  the 
goslings),  they  put  them  sticking  out  of  the  place  from 
which  they  took  out  the  goslings. 

Then  up  woke  Nanabushu.  "Why,  I  have  overslept! 
Perhaps  overdone  must  be  those  goslings  of  mine.  Per 
haps  I  had  better  look  at  them."  As  one  after  another 
he  pulled  out  their  little  feet,  he  was  pulling  them  off. 
"Why,  it  is  true  that  over-long  have  my  goslings  cooked." 
Another  he  tried  in  vain  to  pull  out,  and  that  too  he 
pulled  off.  "It  is  true  that  too  long  have  my  goslings 
been  cooking."  And  so,  when  one  after  another  he  had 


I  IO 

ka'kina  aniciwfkubitot,  "Kanabatc  ma  win  ningigimotimigog," 
inandam.  O'o'dac  uditan  rru  utclt :  "Klgayanimis  kicpin 
ka'kimotimigowanan,"  uditan  'iei/u  utclt.  Mldac  anubaba- 
nantwawanga-i'gat,  mlsa7  kawln  kanaga  pajik  umi'kawasln. 
5  "Micanim!"  i'kito.  "Wantcitotawit  kiwintamawisi'k!"  i'kito. 
Kaga't  unickri'gun  'i8i/u  utclt.  Mlsa7  acimawandcitot  misa'n, 
uticpa'kwisitonan  Ini/u  misan.  Aciki'tcipotawat,  aba' pic 
ka'kitcipotawat  acinisawa'a'ng  49i/u  ickuta.  Amc,  tcagisu. 
Anicagu,  "Tel!"  ka'i'nwawatanig  *i8i/u  utclt;  pmicigu  kasi- 

10  'tawickat,  kasitawitiyat.  Amc  o'O'dac  uditan  48i/u  utclt: 
"Ae8,  ctcin,  tcin,  f;cin!'  ka'i'nwayan  ka'kimotimigoyan  Igi/u 
nini'kansimag,"  uditan  lisi/u  utclt.  Madwatanig.  "  Mlmawl- 
ni'i<u  tcagisugwan,"  ki'i'nandam.  Mldac  ka'i'cii'kugabawit 
cayigwa  anawimadca,  mlgu  iu  ajikaskitosig  lisi/u  anuwima- 

15  dcat.  Mlgu  iu  acitongitiya'a'mit,  anic  kawln  ugackitosm 
liGi/u  tcipimusat.  "Anmta  aci-a*yawanan  ?"  inantam.  Misax 
acipwanawitot  anuwlpimusat.  O'O'dac  kri'nandam;  "Aman- 
tcigic  nantawm  i'i'wisa  kibwanawi'toyan,  tcipimusayan  ?" 
Mldac  ka-i'cinantawabantank  ningutci  ki'tcigickabi'kanig, 

20  cigwadac  ka*i-cicockwatciwat  'i8!7!!!^11  klckabi'kanig.  Kap- 
angicing,  abanabit,  panagu  kaba'a-yagu'kanig  i'i'u  utdmi- 
gitiyan.  Mldac  ka-i-'kitut:  "Ei,  wa'kunag  uga'i-nawan 
anicinabag  tci'a'nia^kiwang !" 


Anrrjaniadcat    niinawa ;    cayigwa   anibabimusat  ngiwab- 

25   andanan  miltigonsan  u'kwa'kitanig.    Anic  ajinisawitiyantank, 

abanabit,    panagu    kamiskwiwa'kwatinig    Ini/u    mi'tigonsan. 

ut£i,   miskwablmagon  ogaitanawan  anicinabag  tci'a'ni'a''ki- 


1 1 1 

taken  them  all  out,  then,  "Perhaps  I  may  have  been 
robbed,"  he  thought.  So  this  he  said  to  his  bottom : 
"You  shall  suffer  if  I  have  been  robbed,"  he  said  to  his 
bottom.  Thereupon  he  searched  about  in  among  the  ashes, 
but  not  a  single  one  did  he  find.  "Wretch!"  he  said. 
"For  what  reason  should  he  thus  treat  me,  that  he  should 
not  tell  me!"  he  said.  Truly  was  he  angered  by  his  bottom. 
And  so,  when  he  set  to  gathering  firewood,  high  he  stacked 
the  pile.  Then  he  kindled  a  great  fire  ;  and  by  the  time 
he  had  the  fire  going  strong,  he  stood  over  the  fire  with 
legs  spread  apart.  Well,  he  was  thoroughly  burned. 
Simply  "Tci!"  was  the  only  sound  the  bottom  made;  (he 
burned)  till  he  was  drawn  tight,  drawn  tight  at  the  bottom. 
So  then  this  he  said  to  his  bottom:  "Yes,  'tcP,  tcln,  tc!n !' 
is  what  you  say  after  letting  me  be  robbed  of  those  gos 
lings  of  mine,"  he  said  to  his  bottom.  He  heard  it  utter 
a  sound.  "Perhaps  it  may  now  be  thoroughly  burned," 
he  thought.  And  after  he  had  taken  his  stand  away 
(from  the  fire),  he  then  tried  in  vain  to  go ;  but  he  was 
unable  to  try  to  start.  And  so  his  legs  were  stretched  far 
apart,  but  he  was  not  able  to  walk.  "Wonder  what  may 
be  the  matter  with  me !"  he  thought.  And  so  he  was 

c"> 

without  strength  when  he  tried  to  walk.  So  this  he  thought : 
"I  am  curious  to  know  what  it  is  that  prevents  me  from 
being  able  to  walk."  And  when  he  had  sought  for  a 
place  where  there  was  a  very  steep  cliff,  then  down  from 
the  cliff  he  slid.  When  he  alighted,  he  looked  back  (and) 
saw  nothing  but  the  sore  of  his  bottom  along  where  he 
had  slid.  And  this  was  what  he  said:  "Oh,  lichens  shall 
the  people  call  it  as  long  as  the  world  lasts!" 

Then  he  continued  on  his  way  again.  Now,  while  he 
was  walking  about,  he  saw  a  dense  growth  of  shrub.  Now, 
as  he  walked  through  their  midst,  he  then  looked  behind, 
and  all  the  way  was  the  shrub  reddened.  "Oh,  red  willows 


I  1  2 

wang !      Anicinabag     sagaswawat     uga'a-'pa'kusiganawan," 
kri-'kito. 

Mldac     ka-a-ni-ijimadcat.        Ningutingigu     anibabimusat 

mlnawa     ka'a'nrrjinisawitiyantank     mi'tigonsan,     kawlndac 

5   kwa'tc    miskwlwa'kusininiwan.      "Wo'o'wisa    uga'rcini'kata- 

nawa    anicinabag    tci-a'iii'a-'kiwang,    pagwatc  miskwabima- 

gog  ta'i'nawag,"  kl' 


12.    NANABUSHU  EATS  THE  ARTICHOKES. 

Midac     ka-a-ni-i*cimamadcat.       Ningutingigu     papimusat 
awiya      uglwabamas.        "Anln      acinickasuyag?"      ugri'na8. 
10   "Kuniga  kitamugumwatug  ?" 

"Ayes,"    ugri'go8.      Midac  ka'i'gut :    "Ayes,   kagat  ninta- 
mugomin." 

"Amc  ani'kagayag  'i^wisa  nlbiwa  amugoyag?" 

"Kawinsa  winigu  kago  nintini'kagaslmin.     Mlsa  ya'tagu 
15   Ii8i/u  pogisi'kagayank." 


Midac  ka-i-ci'a-mwat,  anic  ugri*gofi  i*i'u  amuntwa ;  pama 
ka'ta'a'mwat  ugrponi*atfi.  "Kagatsa  klwmgipugusim," 
ugri'na8.  Mldac  a'pra'nimamadcat.  Ningutingigu  anipa- 
pimusat  pamagu  tatanaming,  "PonG!"  inwanit.  Acimadci- 
20  pa'tot,  "Awanan  ka'i'nwat?"  krrnandam.  Wasa  pagami- 
'pa'tot.  Magwagu  mlnawa  anipapimusat,  "Po8!"  inwawan 
awiya,  acra/pamipagisut,  "Awanan  ka'i'nwat?"  kri'nan- 
tam.  Magwagu  mlnawa  anipapimusat,  panimagu  wantci- 


shall  the  people  call  them  till  the  end  of  the  world !  The 
people,  when  they  smoke,  shall  use  them  for  a  mixture 
(in  their  tobacco),"  he  said. 

And  so  upon  his  way  he  then  started.  And  by  and 
by,  as  he  went  travelling  along,  he  again  went  wading 
through  some  bushes,  but  not  quite  so  much  were  they 
reddened.  "This,  indeed,  shall  the  people  call  them  till 
the  end  of  the  world,  -  -  wild  red  willows  shall  they  be 
called,"  he  said. 

12.  NANABUSHU  EATS  THE  ARTICHOKES. : 

So  then  upon  his  way  he  slowly  went  along.  And 
once  while  travelling  along  he  saw  some  creatures.  "  What 

o  o 

are  you  called?"  he  said  to  them.  "Wonder  if  you  may 
be  eaten  for  food  !" 

"Yes,"  he  was  told.  Now,  this  was  what  he  was  told: 
"Yes,  truly  we  are  eaten  for  food." 

"What  is  your  effect  upon  one  after  a  great  deal  of 
you  has  been  eaten?" 

"No  (evil)  effect  of  any  sort  do  we  leave.  The  only 
thing  we  do  is  to  make  one  windy  in  the  stomach." 

Thereupon  he  ate  them,  for  he  was  told  that  they  were 
good  to  eat ;  not  till  he  had  had  his  fill  of  them  did  he 
leave  them  alone.  "Truly  a  pleasing  taste  you  have,"  he 
said  to  them.  And  so  then  he  kept  straight  on  his  course 
of  travel.  Now,  once  as  he  was  travelling  along,  of  a 
sudden  at  the  rear,  "Po!"  came  a  sound.  As  he  started 
running,  "Who  was  it  made  that  noise?"  he  thought. 
Afar  was  he  now  getting  while  on  the  run.  And  while 
again  he  was  walking  along,  "Po!"  was  the  sound  some 
thing  uttered;  when  round  he  whirled,  "Who  was  it  made 
that  sound?"  he  thought.  And  while  again  he  was  walking 

1   For  another  version  see  No.   23. 

8 — PUBL.    AMER.    ETHN.    SOC.    VOL.    VII. 


pogitit  acimadclpa'tot.  "Ambasano,  ningagagwanagana 
^a'11  ka/rnwat,"  krrnantam.  Kwatciku'ku  aninanawatcisat 
pamagu  mlnawa,  "Pon{M"  anwanit.  Misa'  sagisit.  "Amba 
sano,  ninga-a/'kamawa  'aV11  ka-rnwat,"  krrnandam.  Aci'a'- 
5  'kandwadank  Ii8i/u  umi'kana ;  mlsagu  klci-a'caglwa,  midac 
inia"  wansabandank  Ii8i/u  umi'kana.  Panimagu  mlnawa 
npi'kwanang  uwlya  nwantawat.  Mlsa7  untcita  anwanit, 
uPonC!"  Acipasiguntcisat.  "Taba'pinisiwagan,  awanac  wara/u 
pamfnica'O'gwan !  Ka/tcimanitowigwan,"  ki-rnantam  aci- 

10  madclpa'tot  kistcra'nigu4k.  Magwagu  anipimipa'tot,  pamagu 
mlnawa,  "PonC!"  Ki'tciwasa  pangicin,  apamipagisut  •  anlc, 
kawin  owabamasln  anu'a-swaganat.  Panimagu  mlnawa 
Wwiti  upi'kwanang  wantcinontagusinit,  "Pon!"  "Taba- 
'pinisiwagan  !"  inandam  acimadcipa'tot.  Mlgiri'ma11  maclcl- 

15   pa'tot,     mlnawa,      "Pon8!"       "Taba/pinisiwagan !"    inandam 

anigirk  ajimadclpa'tot ;  kagu'pri'gu  pacux  aba'to,  pimipa'tot 

anigu'k.      Mlsax    undcita    ani'tank   utackwayaming,    "Ponl:!" 

Kagu'pigu    antasupangicink,    "PonC,   pon8,  pon8,   ponS,   ponf: !" 

-  "Midac  'ifii/u  ml'taglni/u  ka'i'ciwat  niclmayagsa  klbiwaba- 

20  magwa  Igi/n  ackipwag.1  'Nimpogisi'kakamin,'  ningrrgog. 
Takln,  ei,  nimpogit!  mlsa/  ka/r'kitowat  anicinabag  nicijayag, 
tcini'a''klwank."  Magwagu  anipapimusat,  panimagu  mlnawa, 
-  "Ei,  nimpogit!" 

1   Ackipwag,   "artichokes:"   literally,  "raw  objects." 


along,  suddenly  from  the  place  where  he  broke  wind  he 
started  running.  "Well,  now,  I  will  try  to  leave  behind 
the  one  that  is  making  the  sound,"  he  thought.  Just  as 
he  was  about  to  slacken  his  speed,  then  suddenly  again, 
"Po!"  was  the  sound  something  made.  Thereupon  he 
became  afraid.  "Well,  now,  I  will  watch  for  the  one  that 
uttered  the  sound,"  he  thought.  Then  he  lay  in  wait  for 
it  beside  the  path ;  and  then  a  short  ways  back  he  went, 
and  so  from  there  by  the  road  he  watched  for  it.  Suddenly 
again  at  his  back  some  creature  he  heard.  And  as  before, 
it  uttered  the  same  "Po!"  Then  up  he  leaped  to  his  feet. 
"  For  goodness  sake  !  wonder  who  it  is  that  may  be  fol 
lowing  me !  It  must  be  a  great  manitou  being,"  he  thought 
as  he  started  running  at  the  very  top  of  his  speed.  And 
while  he  was  running  along,  suddenly  again,  "Po!"  A 
great  distance  off  he  landed,  when  round  he  whirled ;  why, 
he  did  not  see  the  one  at  whom  he  tried  in  vain  to  aim 
a  blow.  And  later  again,  from  yonder  at  his  back,  was 
heard  the  sound  of  some  one  saying,  "Po!"  "For  good 
ness  sake !"  he  thought  as  he  started  running.  And  there 
where  he  started  running,  again,  "Po!"  "For  goodness 
sake !"  he  thought  as  with  speed  he  started  running.  Then 
at  last  a  short  way  he  ran ;  as  he  went,  he  ran  with  speed. 
But  what  he  heard  behind  him  was  still  the  same  sound, 
"Po!"  Then  finally  at  every  step  he  took  it  was,  "Po, 
po,  po,  po,  po !"  "Why,  this  was  just  what  my  little 
brothers  told  me  when  I  saw  the  artichokes.1  'We  make 
people  windy  in  the  stomach,'  I  was  told.  Oh,  why,  I 
am  breaking  wind  !  That  is  what  the  people,  my  uncles, 
shall  say  till  the  end  of  the  world."  And  while  he  went 
walking  along,  then  of  a  sudden  again,  "Po!"  -  "Why,  I 
am  breaking  wind !" 


n6 


13.   NANABUSHU  AND  THE  CRANBERRIES. 

Aye8,  anipapimusat  acimadabit  sibi  a'panagu  inabit  anlbi 
minan  ka/a-yitcitagiskotanig.  "Kaga't  pama  tamltciyan 
ningaponi'tonan,"  inantam.  Mldac  igu  clgwa  acru'cigaba- 
wi'tank;  inabit  rrwiti  nibi'kang,  panagu  anlbiminan.  "Taga, 
5  ml  iwiti  ni'tam  ningamltcinan,"  krrnandam.  Acigagltci- 
kunaya'u't  aciba'kubikwackwanit  anupapanantublkantcigat. 
Wagunac  kamrkwandank?  A'kwanapawat,  acimockamut ; 
inabit,  ml  gayubi  ka'i*nagotanik  ini/u  anlbiminan.  "Aman- 
tcigic  48i/u  klmrkwandanziwan  ?"  inandam.  Mlnawa  ajipa- 
10  'kublkwackwanit,  aciklcklngwacink ;  mldac  aci*a-gwaslt 
acimawit.  Anlc  wlsagicin,  pana  mlgu  miskwi  usklcigunk. 
Agwasltidac  ajiki'tcimawit  •,  magwagu  mawit,  kago  unana- 
cabickagun.  Acipa'katawabit  inabit,  panagu  anlbiminan. 
Utanimamatantanan.  Ka'tamitcit  aciponi'tot. 


14.   NANABUSHU  AND  THE  CARIBOU. 

Mianicmamadcat.  Ningutingigu  anipapimusat,  tcimica- 
waskusiwagani  waditank.  Ajrrnabit  i'i'witi  waya  lkwackusi/u 
tci'a'yaba  ati'kwan  klpimatabickusiwawan.  Kagatsa  umi- 


13.   NANABUSHU  AND  THE  CRANBERRIES.1 

Yea,  as  he  went  walking  along,  he  came  out  upon  a 
river,  where,  while  looking  about,  he  saw  nothing  but  high- 
bush  cranberries  that  hung  with  drooping  head.  "Truly, 
not  till  after  I  have  eaten  enough  will  I  leave  them  alone," 
he  thought.  So  thereupon  he  then  went  and  stood  in 
their  midst ;  as  he  looked  down  in  the  water,  nothing 
(could  be  seen)  but  high-bush  cranberries.  "  Now,  those 
yonder  first  will  I  eat,"  he  thought.  When  he  was  un 
dressed,  he  then  leaped  into  the  stream  where  beneath 
the  water  he  sought  for  things  to  eat.  But  what  was 
there  for  him  to  bite  upon  ?  He  was  getting  out  of  breath 
in  the  water  when  he  then  came  up  to  the  surface ;  as 
he  looked,  there  still  hung  the  high-bush  cranberries. 

C5  O 

"Wonder  how  I  did  not  bite  upon  any!"  he  thought. 
When  again  into  the  water  he  leaped,  he  cut  his  face  by 
landing  (on  a  rock)  •  and  so  when  he  came  out  of  the 
water,  he  was  weeping.  Naturally,  he  was  hurt  in  the  fall ; 
and,  to  crown  all,  his  eyes  were  filled  with  blood.  And 
as  he  came  out  of  the  water,  he  was  crying  bitterly ;  and 
while  he  cried,  he  felt  the  rub  of  something  across  the 
face.  On  opening  his  eyes  to  see,  he  glanced  about, 
and  there  were  the  high-bush  cranberries  without  measure. 
Thither  he  went,  and  ate  of  them  without  stint.  After 
he  had  eaten  enough,  then  he  quit. 

14.   NANABUSHU  AND  THE  CARIBOU. 2 

Thereupon  he  continued  steadily  on  his  way.  Now, 
once  while  he  was  walking  along,  to  a  wide  field  of  high 
grass  he  came.  As  he  looked  toward  the  other  end  of 

i  For  another  version  see  No.   21.  2  For  another  version  see  No.   19. 


n8 

sawinawan.  "Amantcigic  ka/rna'pinanawagipanan  ?"  Aci- 
wabamigut,  "Intacltug  kapasamit,"  inandam  lau  adilk. 
"Tagantawa  ninga'a'cima,"  animadclba'to  'a5:a/u  adi'k. 
Cigwa  kaga't  umadwakanonigon :  utAi,  niclmisa',  amantcwin 
5  48i/u  kltotaman  ningutci  wayapaminanin  ?  A'kawa,  klwiti- 
batcimo'tawin !  Kaga't  ki'tci'i'nakamigat  o'o'witi  wantu- 
sayan,"  udinan.  "Awawa,  undas,  plcan !  Kawln  kitana- 


nlsananimisl." 


Midac  kaga't  ka'plji'i'canit  i'i'man   ayat. 

10  "Tiwa/,  kaga'tigu  tci'i'na'kamigat  pitcmagu,  kmisitiwag ; 
ki'tciwawlyag  kru'ndcinanitiwag ;  kipickwa'taginu'tatiwag." 
Anic  mlgu'i'ma11  apitcitanatcimu'tawat  aci'i^kwa^tackawat 
ini/u  umi'tigwabin.  "O'O'wisagu  totamobamg."  A'cinani- 
ma'kwlnotawat  rrma11  waca'plnit.1  "Mlsa  wuco"  antota- 

15   mowa'pan,"  udinan.      Acipimwat  iiman  waca/plnit. 


"Micanim   Nanabucu  !      Kaga't  anaglnanimagiban." 


Anic  misax  ka'i'cinisat,  acimatci'kawat.  Papanaginanga 
i'kamowan ;  acipapimagotot  !ni'u  uwininoman ;  acigapaci- 
mat  ka'kina.  Ka/rciklziswat,  ugltackwamag  ugl'a'gwawan. 
20  Midac  ka/r'kitut  a'pi  ka'u'nabrtawat :  "Tibigic  kauntama- 
wagan  ?"  krr'kitd.  "Intawasa  uctigwaning  ninga'U'ntama. 
Kamawln  nintaminu'tcigasl,  nintapa'pri'gog  nlnimucanyag 3 
ugra'cawabaman,"  grrnandam.  "Nindaba'pi'igog  nlnimo- 

1   At  the  Caribou's  side. 

~  Ninimuca"yag.l    "my    loves;"    literally,    "my    cousins;"    more  literally  still,  "my 
relatives"  (that  are  the  children  of  the  sister  of  my  mother). 


119 

the  meadow,  (he  saw)  a  big  bull  Caribou  come  walking  out 
upon  the  stretch  of  grass,  and  so  he  (Nanabushu)  wanted 
to  cret  him.  "Wonder  how  can  I  get  hold  of  him!" 

o  o 

When  (Nanabushu)  was  seen,  "Without  fail  he  will  have 
something  to  say  to  me,"  thought  the  Caribou.  "1  think 
I  will  draw  him  on."  Off  running  started  the  Caribou. 
Then  truly  the  voice  of  Nanabushu  was  heard  saying  to 
him:  "Hey,  my  little  brother,  would  that  I  knew  why  you 
act  so  whenever  I  see  you  anywhere!  Wait,  I  wish  to  tell 
you  something !  Truly,  a  great  time  is  going  on  over 
there  from  whence  I  have  come,"  he  said  to  him.  "Ay, 
hither,  come  here !  You  have  no  cause  to  fear  me." 

It  was  true  that  he  went  to  where  (Nanabushu)  was. 

"Ah,  but  there  truly  was  a  great  time  going  on  yesterday, 
they  were  killing  one  another ;  for  no  reason  were  they 
slaying  one  another ;  they  shot  one  another  indiscriminately 
with  arrows."  Now,  while  he  was  telling  him  the  story, 
he  was  stringing  his  bow.  "This  was  the  very  way  they 
did  at  the  time."  All  the  while  he  kept  aiming  there  at 
his  l  side.  "This  was  just  the  way  they  did,"  he  said  to 
him.  Then  he  shot  him  in  the  side. 

"  Confound  Nanabushu  !  Truly,  that  was  the  very  thing 
I  thought  he  would  do." 

So  after  he  had  killed  (the  Caribou),  he  then  set  to  work 
flaying  (and)  cutting  him  up.  Exceedingly  fat  was  (the 
Caribou) ;  then  he  went  (and)  hung  up  his  fat ;  then  he 
boiled  it  all.  After  he  had  finished  cooking  it,  then  out 
upon  a  sheet  of  birch-bark  he  dipped  the  meat.  And  this 
was  what  he  said  when  he  came  to  where  it  lay :  "  Wonder 
from  what  part  of  the  body  I  shall  take  (what  I  am  to  eat)!" 
he  said.  "I  think  that  from  the  head  I  will  take  what  I 
am  to  eat  of  him.  -  Perhaps  it  would  not  be  proper  for 
me  to  do  that,  for  I  should  be  made  fun  of  by  my  loves  3 
on  account  of  my  having  begun  at  the  opposite  end," 


120 

canyag,"  klnandam.  "Amantcisawln  rrwiti  upi'kwanang 
undamak?  Kawlnsa,  kanabatc  nindaba'prrgog.  Kanabatc 
uglkantcwabaman  ki'tciayaba'a'di'kwan,  ninda/rgog  mawin 
nlnimucanyag.  Amantcisawln  pimi'tcayaTundamak?"  krr- 
5  nandam.  "Kawlnsa,  kanabatc  nindapa'pr'i-gok.  Ugipimi- 
tcwabaman  ninda'i'gok  ki'tci-a-yaba'a'di'kwan,  nmimocanyag 


ninda'i'gog." 


Magwagu  tanwawa'tod  mlslwa  tciga'tig  ugibaba'a-'ton 
umama'i'biman.  Midac  a'pl  ajinondagwatinig  kisiba'kwat, 

10  "Kaga/tsa  ningi'tcisasiskimigun.  Kanabatcsa  kaya  win 
wlwlsini."  Kapa'kwacwat  i'i-man  uwlninowinit,  acra'lkwan- 
tawiit.  Midac  iwiti  awiposinang ;  l  kayagu  wlninon  ugisin- 
da'kwiciman.  Aciki'tcipltanimadinik,  acita'kwamigut  'ici/u 
kislba'kwat.  A1,  mlsa  ima11  a'i'ntanagosit !  Pinicigu  kabci- 

15   ya-r   agosi. 


Ningutingigu  inabit  iwiti  wayakwakusi/u  ma*rngana8  un- 
tatabipa'rtiwa51,  midac  acikanonat :  "Kagu  win  oman  pica- 
kagun  !" 

"  Kago    mawin    ugini'tonatug    Nanabucu.      'A'a'11,    taga 
20  a'pa'i'tita !"        Intigumi      kibigagwatcikanitiwa<:.        Cayigwa 
pagamisawav:,    aciwabamanit  ini/u  udadi'kuman.      A'paniigu 
kama'kandinit. 

AeXi,  anlc  kagldotank,  misa'pana  udadi'kuman.  Acika 
nonat:  "Niclmisa,  kagi/  win  tcatclga'tig  pa-i'nabi'kagun  !" 


1   Awiposinang:    the    real    sense    is    that    "he    went    (and)    greased"    (the  place). 
The  expression   is  a  Bois   Fort  idiom. 


(thus)  he  thought.  "I  should  be  laughed  at  by  my  loves," 
(thus)  he  thought.  "Wonder  if  it  would  be  well  for  me 
to  eat  of  him  at  the  back !  -  -  No,  indeed,  for  probably  I 
should  then  be  laughed  at.  -  -  'Perhaps  he  shoved  the  big- 
bull  Caribou  forward  while  eating  upon  him,'  would  be  said 
of  me  perhaps  by  my  loves.  -  -  Wonder  if  it  would  be  well 
for  me  to  eat  of  him  at  the  side!"  (thus)  he  thought. 
"No  indeed,  for  perhaps  I  should  be  laughed  at.  -  -  'He 
tried  to  push  a  great  bull  caribou  sidewise  when  eating 
upon  him,'  would  be  said  of  me  by  my  loves." 

And  while  engaged  in  this  talk,  he  laid  round  about 
the  foot  of  a  tree  all  the  grease  (which  he  had  boiled 
down).  And  so  when  the  creaking  of  trees  rubbing  (to 
gether)  was  heard,  "Truly  by  some  one  am  I  sought 
beseechingly.  Perhaps,  indeed,  some  one  too  wants  to  eat." 
After  slicing  off  a  piece  from  a  fatty  part  (of  the  caribou), 
then  up  the  tree  he  climbed.  And  so  there  he  went  and 
placed  the  fat ;  l  and  he  put  the  fat  in  where  it  was 
creaking.  When  a  great  gust  of  wind  came  up,  he  was 
then  caught  fast  by  the  creaking  tree.  Ah,  and  so  there 
he  hung !  Even  till  a  long  while  after  was  he  hanging. 

Then    suddenly,   while  looking  toward  the  other  end  of 

J  >  o 

the  meadowy  (he  saw)  some  wolves  running  hitherward 
into  the  meadow,  whereupon  he  addressed  them,  saying: 
"Don't  you  come  this  way!" 

"Something  doubtless  must  Nanabushu  have  slain.  Come 
on,  do  let  us  run  over  there!"  It  seemed  as  if  they  tried 
to  race  (to  where  he  was).  Now,  when  they  came  running 
up  to  the  place,  they  saw  his  caribou.  Straightway  did 
they  fall  upon  it,  grabbing  it  from  one  another. 

Alas !  naturally  was  there  nothing  for  him  to  do,  for 
entirely  gone  was  his  caribou.  Then  he  addressed  them, 
saying:  "O  my  little  brothers!  don't  you  come  and  look 
round  about  this  tree !" 


]  22 

"'A'a'11,  kago  ogla'tonatug !"  Mldac  kaga't  kama'kan- 
dinitigu  umama'rbiman.  Cigwa  wanimadclba'rtIwaL>,  "Kagux 
win,  nicimisatug,  icpiming  inabi'kagun !"  Anic  acida'ta- 
ganapiwat  !gi/u  ma'Pnganag,  panagu  winin  ka*i-nagotanig. 
5  Anic  kaya  kama^kandinit  i'i'u  ma'rngana.  Ka^kitanawanit 
animadcibai'tinit ;  acipagitamigut.  Nap^m  upagitamigun 
i'i*u  kislba'kwat. 


Acinisantawat.  Misa'  anugwinawri'crkank,  anic  mra-'ta 
utoctigwanim  a'tanig.  Anic  utanutclctclgwantan  rru  utoc- 

10  tigwanim.  Anic  mlya/ta  wlnintip  ayanig.  Anic  ukwlna- 
wri'na'pinaton.  "Taga  intawa,  ningakinabi'konsi^kas," 
kri'nantam.  Mldac  kaga't  ka'i-cinagusit,  mi'i-wati  wlnintip 
wantci'tot.  Magwagu  tacl'kank  aci'a'nicinabawit,  mlsa7 
madcat.  Mldac  aci'irtackanimagatinig,  a1,  anic  gaglcictcigat ! 

15   Acipita'kwicink,    "Kitawanana'tigo,   niclmisar" 


"Aye5:,   ninisa'ku  pagwata'kamik  kananibaxviyan." 

ttOn,   niclmisa,   kiminaikowimlzan." 

«Ayee,"  ugi-i-gon. 

Minawa  acipita'kwicink,    "  Kitawanana'tigo,   niclmisa  ?' 

20        "Nlnisa'ku  wadciwink  kananlbawiyan." 
U0n,  kicingwa'kowimizan." 
Minawa  acipita^kwicing,    "Kitawanana^igo?" 


"Come  on,  something  he  probably  has  laid  out  (there)!" 
Whereupon  truly  they  grabbed  away  from  one  another 
the  grease  (which  he  had  boiled  down).  Presently  were 
they  about  to  race  away  when,  "Don't  now,  O  my  little 
brothers,  don't  you  look  up !"  So  when  up  the  Wolves 
looked,  nothing  but  fat  (did  they  see)  hanging  there.  So 
of  course  the  Wolves  also  grabbed  that  away  from  one 
another.  After  they  had  eaten  it  up,  then  away  they 
went  racing ;  then  was  he  let  loose  from  the  grip.  When 
it  was  all  over,  he  was  set  free  by  the  creaking  tree. 

Then  down  he  climbed  from  the  tree.  Thereupon  he 
went  in  vain  to  see  what  he  yet  had  left,  for  there  remained 
only  his  (caribou)  head.  So  he  tried  in  vain  to  gnaw 
upon  what  was  left  (of  the  meat  of)  his  (caribou)  head. 
Now  only  the  brain  was  left.  Naturally  he  had  no  means 
of  getting  at  it.  "Then,  therefore,  I  will  take  on  the  form 
of  a  little  snake,"  he  thought.  Thereupon  truly  that  was 
the  form  he  took  upon  himself,  the  reason  he  did  it  was 
on  account  of  the  brain  there  (in  the  skull).  And  while 
busied  with  the  brain  he  became  a  human  being,  where 
upon  off  he  started.  And  so  when  there  were  horns 
(upon  his  head),  ah,  what  was  he  then  to  do !  When  he 
bumped  against  a  tree,  "  What  sort  of  a  tree  are  you, 
my  little  brother?"  (he  asked.) 

"Ay,  in  the  deep  solutide  of  the  forest  ever  do  I 
stand." 

"Then  really,  my  little  brother,  you  must  be  a  tamarack." 

"Yes,"  he  was  told. 

When  he  bumped  against  another  tree,  "  What  kind  of 
a  tree  are  you,  my  little  brother?"  he  asked. 

"Always  upon  the  mountain  do   I  stand." 

"Then,  indeed,  you   must  (then)  be  a  pine." 

When  lie  bumped  against  another  tree,  "What  kind  of 
a  tree  are  you  ?"  (he  asked.) 


124 


"Nlnisa'ku  kawawasana'kikabawiyan  ningutci  saga'i'gan 
tayabina'kwa'kin." 

u  Nicimisa,  kiwlgwasiwimizan."  Anlcimadcat.  Minawa 
acipitackwicink,  "Kitawanana'tigu,  nicimisa?" 


5        "  Nmisa'ku  ningutci  saga'i'gan  ayagin  nomaga  no'piming 
kananibwiyan." 

"On,   nicimisa,  kitasatlwimizan." 
KAye8." 

Minawa  anicirnaclcat.      Minawa  ajipita'kwicink,    "Kitawa- 
10  nana'tigu,   nicimisa?" 

"Nmisa'ku    saga'i'ganing    a'kugicka'kamigag    kananlba- 
wiyan." 

"On,   nicimisa,   kiglciklvvimizan." 

"Ayeu,"   udigon. 

15  Anicimadcat,  pitcinagigu  ani'irda'a'mlt  acipa'kubita'ku- 
'kit.  Anlc  mlgu  acipana^klnank  acimadclyatagat.  lj^pi- 
matagat,  ningutingigu  awiya  unontawa :  "'E'e'e,  adi'k 
pamadagat!"  i'kitowa5''.  Amc,  "'A-'a'11,  mawinata'ir'k !" 
Anlc  misa  gaga't  mawinata'irnt.  Anlc  kawln  nantagani- 
20  must  pirnatagat.  Ackam  pacwawitamo,  kawln  nantagani- 
musl.  "A'e'e7,  kimicaganigunan !" 


"Mlnangwana  cigwa  anawi  pacwabatamowanan,"  inantam. 

Anlc  kawln  nantaganimusl  pirnatagat.     Ackam  pigigitowa8, 

"Taba'pinisiwagan,     misa     rnicaganinank !"      Ka*itlkitunint. 

25   Acitaba'klnank,  waylbagu  taba'kinank.      Anlc  mlnangwana 

cockwanabi'kanig    i'i-man    ka'iji'a'gwasiba'tod.      Magwagu 


'25 

"Continually  do  I  stand  with  glistening  top  for  one  that 
comes  in  sight  of  a  lake  anywhere." 

"My  little  brother,  you  then  must  be  a  birch."  Then 
on  his  way  he  went.  When  he  bumped  against  another 
tree,  "What  kind  of  a  tree  are  you,  my  little  brother?" 
(he  asked.) 

"Wherever  there  is  a  lake,  then  a  short  way  back  in 
the  forest  is  where  I  always  stand." 

"Really,   my  little  brother,  you  then  must  be  a  poplar." 

"Yes."' 

Then  on  his  way  he  continued.  When  he  bumped 
against  another  tree,  "What  kind  of  a  tree  are  you,  my 
little  brother?"  (he  asked.) 

"Always  by  the  bank  of  a  lake  do   I  stand." 

"Oh,   my  little  brother,   then  you   must  be  a  cedar." 

"Yes,"   he  was  told. 

Then  on  his  way  he  started,  and  the  instant  he  made 
another  step  he  walked  into  the  water.  Well,  he  then 
began  wading  out  into  the  water,  then  he  began  swimming. 
While  swimming  along  he  suddenly  heard  the  sound  of 
somebody  (saying) :  "Halloo,  there  goes  a  caribou  swimming 
along!"  they  said.  Then,  "Come  on,  go  after  it!"  So 
thereupon  they  truly  started  after  it.  Now,  with  all  his 
power  he  swam.  As  nearer  he  heard  the  sound  of  them, 
then  with  all  his  speed  did  he  go.  "Halloo,  we  shall  be 
beaten  to  the  shore !" 

"It  is  possible  that  I  surely  must  be  getting  close  (to 
the  shore),"  he  thought.  Yet  with  all  his  might  he  swam. 
Nearer  came  the  sound  of  their  voices,  near  by  he  heard 
them  saying:  "Too  bad,  he  is  landing  ahead  of  us!" 
(Such)  was  what  they  said.  Then  he  came  to  where  he 
could  touch  bottom,  soon  was  he  where  he  could  touch 
bottom.  Now,  it  happened  to  be  a  slippery  bank  where 


126 

anibabimipa'tod  acrujajabi'kicink  aciblkusitod  lici/u  utdcti- 
gwanim.  Inabiwat  igi/u  anicinabag,  Nanabucowan  anrirn- 
dciklgitowan  :  "Kaga'tigu  adi'k  pamatagat,  kagatigu  ati'k 
pamatagat,"  ani'i^kitowan  Nanabucowan,  anigagawa'piwan. 
5  Kawln  kanaga  piyapimigabawdslwan,  pana  mlsa  anipapi- 
musat. 


15.  NANABUSHU  FLIES  WITH  THE  GEESE. l 

Ningutingigu  anipapimusat  saga'i'gan  acimatablt,  alpa- 
nagu  nrkafi  tnanominilkawas.  Kagatsa  umisawinawa8,  anlc 
acikanonat :  "Ambasano,2  klgawitclwininim,"  udina8. 

10        "Awawa,    Nanabucu,"    udigoc.      "Migu   lisi/u  a'kawii  uci- 

'toyang  wanawa'poyang." 

Anlc    acipa'kublt    kaya  win   Nanabucu.      Mlsa  kayii  win 

antotaminit    anutotank,    mlsa7  kawln  umilkobiga'a>nsln   'iT11 

manomin. 
15        "Amn,    Nanabucu?      Intigo    kucagu    kibwranawiton    i'i<u 


manomin." 


"Aye8,   nimbwanawiton." 

"'A'a''11,  intawa  mri'u  mini'k.      Papanglns  'ici/u  manomin," 
itiwa8   H7'11  ni'ka1.      Ningutingigu   cigwa  utigoE :    "Mlsa  wa- 
20  bank    wlmadcayang,"    utigo8    48i/u    ni'ka'.      Mldac  ka'i'nat : 
"Aniga'ka  kitakackl'i'slm  kaya  nin   tcipimisayamban  r" 


"Nanabucu,  anawi  kitakackri'go  tcipimisayan,  kawlnidac 
kitapisindanzl  4i8i/u  ka-i'goyambam." 

1  For  another  version  see  No.   56. 


12; 

he  ran  up  out  of  the  water.  And  while  he  was  running 
along,  he  slipped  and  fell  upon  a  rock,  bursting  open  his 
(caribou)  head.  As  the  people  looked,  (they  saw)  Nana- 
btishu,  who  said  as  he  went  running  from  there:  "Truly 
it  was  a  caribou  swimming  along,  truly  it  was  a  caribou 
swimming  along,"  said  Nanabushu  as  he  went,  as  he  fell 
headlong  laughing.  Not  did  he  stop  in  his  career  to  look 
back  at  them,  ever  straight  ahead  he  continued  his  way. 

15.  NANABUSHU  FLIES  WITH  THE  GEESE. l 

Now,  once  while  walking  along,  out  upon  a  lake  he 
came,  and  everywhere  were  Geese  feeding  on  rice.  Truly 
much  he  envied  them,  so  he  then  addressed  them,  saying: 
"I  pray  you,2  let  me  in  among  you,"  he  said  to  them. 

"Very  well,  Nanabushu,"  he  was  told.  "But  we  first 
are  laying  in  store  the  food  that  we  shall  eat  on  the  way." 

So  into  the  water  went  Nanabushu  too.  And  what 
they  did  he  tried  to  do  too,  but  he  found  no  rice  in  the 
water. 

"What,  Nanabushu?  Seemingly,  indeed,  are  you'without 
success  in  finding  rice." 

"  Ay,   I   am   not  successful." 

"There,  now,  that  is  enough.  Each  (of  us)  now  has  a 
small  bit  of  rice,"  to  one  another  said  the  Geese.  And 
presently  then  was  he  told  :  "Therefore  on  the  morrow  shall 
we  expect  to  start,"  he  was  told  by  the  Geese.  And  this 
he  then  said  to  them:  "I  want  to  know  if  you  could  fix 
me  up  so  that  I  too  might  fly." 

"Nanabushu,  it  is  quite  within  our  power  to  fix  you  up 
so  that  you  can  fly,  but  you  would  not  listen  to  what 
would  be  told  you." 

2  Ambasano,  "I  pray  you."  This  adverb  is  rendered  in  various  ways  throughout 
the  texts,  sometimes  with  a  finite  verb,  as  here;  its  general  sense  is  that  of  an 
entreaty. 


128 

"On,   manii,   niclmisa,   icrrciyu'k  tcipimisayan !" 

Mldac  kagact  lau  ugrrgon :  "  Ayangwamisin  dac  win. 
O'crman  abi'tawaiyaT  anicinabag  pa'taTnuwag.  A'p!  iman 
anitagwicinank,  kagu  inabi'kan,  kigasa'kwanigunanig.  Aya- 
5  ngwamisin,  kagux  inabi'kan  •  mlgu  siu  tcibangicinan  klcpin 
inabiyan.  Mlya'tagu  i*i'man  acicagwanimigoyan,"  l  udigd?;. 
Mldac  antacinit  ka'kina  papajik  umigwanini  ka'i'cimmigut. 
"Tagackuma,  kutcipasigvva'u'n." 

Mldac    kagalt     ka'i'cipasigwa'u't,     ka'i'cikiwi'tagamasat. 
10   "Mlsa7  iu  tciwltciwigoyan.     Misax  wabank  tcimadcayang." 

Cigwa  wabanini,  cigwa  pasigwa'O'wa8;  a'pidci  nawaya'r 
icino'a'mawa.  aMrirman  tcipimisay an .  Xawatcigu  una- 
gucik  tciwabamangwa  Igi/u  anicinabag."  Cigwa  gagii't 
okanonigon  :  "Mlcigwa  tababandamank  8i'i'man  ayawat  Igi/u 
15  anicinabag."  Caylgwa  gaga't  rnadwasa'kwanigtiwa^ :  "  A'c'e7, 
nilkag !  Nanabucu  uwldcisama !"  madwa'i'na.  Kaga'pl 
madwa/i'lkitowan  :  "Kanawabami'k,  nackakuca  pagicin  !" 


"Kagu   inabi'kan,   Nanabucu,"   udigo   lisi/u  nilkas. 
Kaga'pl  madwa  nagamowan  : 

20  "Nanabucu  uwitcisama  uciraisa8,  ucimisa8.     Tapangicin. 

Nanabucu  uwitcisama  uclmisa8,  ucimisa8.     Tapangicin. 
Nanabucu  uwitcisama  ucimisa8,  ucimisa8.     Tapangicin." 


"Taga    pina7,    ninga'i'nab,"    inantam.     Acrrnabit,    "a'ta, 


1   Acicagwanimigoyan,   "\ve  fear  you  might  do,"  -—  a  very  free  rendering,  but  yet 


I  29 

"Do  please,  my  little  brothers,  fix  me  up  so  that  I 
may  fly!" 

Whereupon  truly  he  was  told:  "Take  care  that  you 
do  it !  Off  here  about  halfway  are  many  people.  When 
we  are  coming  there,  don't  you  look  down,  for  we  shall 
be  whooped  at.  Do  you  be  careful,  don't  you  look  clown  •, 
for  you  will  surely  fall  if  you  look  down.  That  is  the 
only  thing  we  fear  you  might  do,"  :  he  was  told.  Accord 
ingly  by  every  one  that  was  there  was  he  given  a  feather. 
"Therefore,  now,  just  you  try  to  fly  up." 

Thereupon  truly  up  he  rose  on  the  wing,  then  round 
over  the  lake  he  flew.  "Therefore  now  you  may  go  with 
us.  Now,  to-morrow  is  when  we  shall  start." 

Now  was  the  morrow  come,  now  was  when  they  flew 
away ;  in  the  very  centre  was  he  given  a  place  where  to 
fly.  "It  is  here  you  are  to  fly.  Along  towards  evening 
shall  we  see  the  people."  Sure  enough,  was  he  addressed 
by  one  saying:  "There,  now,  are  we  coming  into  view  of 
the  place  where  the  people  are."  Already  could  they 
truly  hear  (the  people)  whooping  at  them:  "Halloo,  Geese! 
Nanabushu  is  flying  along  with  them !"  was  the  sound  of 
them  speaking  of  him.  At  last  he  heard  them  saying : 
"Why,  look,  he  is  really  falling!" 

"Don't  you  look,  Nanabushu,"  he  was  told  by  the  Geese. 

Finally  he  heard  them  sing  : 

"Nanabushu  flies  in  company  with  his  little  brothers,  with  his  little  brothers. 

May  he  fall. 
Nanabushu  flies  in  company  with  his  little  brothers,  with  his  little  brothers. 

May  he  fall. 
Nanabushu  flies  in  company  with  his  little  brothers,  with  his  little  brothers. 

May  he  fall." 

"I  say,  really,   I  will  take  a  look,"  he  thought.      When 

conveying  the  sense  better  than  the  literal  one,  which  is,  "in  which  you  are  regarded 
unwillingly." 

9 — PUBL.    AMER.    ETHN.    SOC.    VOL.    VII. 


ki'tcodana!  Anln  ka-rniktank  panagu  kaco'kanik  u'tawa- 
gan.  Anuta'taganabit,  aca  wasa  uwitclwagana8.  A'pitci 
na/o'tana  icipangicin. 


Mldac  ka-rcimamandcigwa'pinint.  "Ambasano,  midcinata!" 

5   i'kitowag.    Mlsa'  kaga't  ka/rcimldcinint,  ga^kina  mini'k  ima 

wa^ta^tonit     umltcinicro.       Aba'pic     tciofwa     nakackitcinio-ut 

O  JT  o  C> 

clpitonanit.  Awlya  onontawa:  "Anti  kamltcinint?"  i'kitowa8. 
Kuniginln,  mindimoyaya8,  niciwa  gaglplngwawa8.  "Anti 
kamltcinint?"  prr'kitunit.  Acikanonat :  "Oman  nintaya," 
10  udina8.  Cigwa  udotisigu.1  Caylgwa  uwlmltcinigon  Ini/u 
mindimoyayan,  acikanonat :  "Ic,"  utinan ;  "Kagicwln,  guca 
mlgu  lisi/u  wa-rcimltciciyan  ?  A'kawa  nlni'kti  nintapa-ygu 
wamltciniguwanin." 


"On,"  udigon.    "Kaga  kiwanitotawanan  lafia/u  kamitcinint." 

i  5  Misax  kaga't  aci'a-biskwamigut  kanawabamat ;  kamamo 
wabitanit  igu  iu  mindimoyaya8.  Ka'klcl'kagut  acinanlwanu- 
wat.2  Anrrcimadcat  oma11.  Anipapimusat  saga'i'gan  unia- 
tabln,  mlgu  iu  acipa'kublt  acikislblglt.  Kanawabandank 
49i/u  nibi  mlgu  iu  acipimangutanik  Ii8i/u  moxi.  Ka'a'gwaslt 

20  mldac  alkitut :  "Ka'i'cini'katamowat  anicinabag  nicicanyag 
-  'e',  wlniplg!'3  ta'i'cini'kata  iu  saga-rgan." 

1  Udotisigu,   "to   where  he  was  they   came  5"   more  literally,   "he   was  come  to." 

2  Acinannvanuwat,   "he  clubbed  them  to  death,  first  one,  then  the  other."     "First 
one,   then  the  other,"   is  the  sense  of  the  reduplication   nanl-. 

3  Wlniplg!    "filthy   water!"   —  the   name  of  various  lakes  in  the  Ojibwa  country; 
Lake  Winnipeg  is  one  of  them. 


he  looked,  oh,  what  a  great  town !  Then  what  was  he 
to  hear  but  a  continuous  whizzing-  in  his  ears.  In  vain 
he  tried  keeping  his  look  upwards,  but  already  afar  (had 
gone)  his  companions.  In  the  very  centre  of  the  town 
was  where  he  fell. 

r 

Thereupon  was  he  then  thoroughly  bound  with  cords. 
"Come  on,  let  us  ease  ourselves  upon  him!"  they  said. 
Whereupon  truly  was  he  then  eased  upon,  by  every  one 
there  in  the  town  was  he  eased  upon.  In  course  of  time 
he  became  engulfed  so  deep  in  the  dung  that  he  had  to 
purse  his  lips.  Somebody  he  heard  (asking) :  "  Where  is 
he  who  was  eased  upon  ?"  they  were  saying.  Lo,  (there 
were)  some  old  women,  two  that  were  blind.  "Where  is  he 
that  was  eased  upon  ?"  they  said  as  they  came.  Then  he 
spoke  to  them,  saying:  "Here  I  am,"  he  said  to  them. 
Then  to  where  he  was  they  came.1  Already  was  he 
desired  by  an  old  woman  to  ease  herself  upon  when  he 
addressed  her:  "Wait,"  he  said  to  her;  "really,  now,  is 
this  the  position  you  mean  to  relieve  yourself  upon  me? 
Usually  I  am  first  unbound  before  I  am  relieved  upon." 

"Really,"  he  was  told.  "Nearly  did  we  do  a  mistake 
to  him  who  has  been  eased  upon." 

And  so  truly,  while  being  unbound,  was  he  watching 
them ;  (he  saw  that)  the  old  women  had  dung  in  their 
teeth.  When  he  was  set  free,  then  he  clubbed  them  to 
death,  first  one,  then  the  other.2  Then  on  his  way  he 
continued  from  this  place.  As  he  went  walking  along, 
out  upon  a  lake  he  came,  whereupon  into  the  water  he 
went  (and)  washed  himself.  While  looking  at  the  water, 
he  then  saw  the  dung  floating  thereon.  When  he  came 
out  of  the  water,  this  then  he  said:  "The  name  which  the 
people  my  uncles  shall  call  it  -  -  lah,  filthy  water !'  3  such 
shall  be  the  name  of  the  lake." 


I32 


16.   NANABUSHU  AND  THE  BUZZARD. 

Midac  acimadcat,  kipabamusat.    Ningutingigu  pabamusat 

inabit  icpiming  awiya  ugiwabaman  namadabinit  ana'kwatunk. 

Kaga't  umisawlnawan.     "Ambadac1  kaya  nin,"  krrnandam 

ka'i'cakanonat :    "Kawlnina    kitablcasi,   niclmisa?"   ugTrnan. 

5   Midac  ka'i'gut :    "Kawln,"  ugri'gon. 


"  Anin  kagrrcinagwa'k  2  mini'k  awiya  pawabamag  klnidac 
lri/u  tcipisindawislwambanan  ?" 
"Nanabucu,   klgusin." 

"Kawln    kitagwacisi,"    udinan.      Midac    ka/rciwayacimat, 
10  anic    mlsa7    kap'anoniorut :    "Ambasano,    kao-a'tsa   kimisawi- 

.  o  •  o  •  •  o 

nawin.      Kunigana  wasa  klta'kwabimituo-,"   udinan. 


"Ayee,   kaga't." 

atAu,"    udinan.      Medac    krri'ci'i-nat :    u  Ambasano,   kiga- 
wltclwin." 

15  "Awawa,"  ugl'i'gon.  Midac  ka*rcru'mb!wat  i'i'ma  ana- 
'kwatunk.  Midac  acimadcawat,  madciyasinik  i'i>u  ana'kwat. 
Ninguting  agawa  tabinagwatini  Ii8i/u  a'ki  tcigwa  udinani- 
migon.  ulndacltug  wawiyac  nandagini'tatotawat.  Amba 
sano,  wawiyac  ningatotawa,"  kri-riandam.  Midac  ka/rci- 

20  pa'kwayasininik  liei/u  ana'kwat.  Mlnawa  acipa'kwayasininik ; 
iickamigu  agasani  ina  ayawat.  Kaga'pi  kagagu  anigu- 
'kwabiwat  Inigu'kwani.  Ningutingigu  ka'i'citacki'kanik 
papa^kankinamadapiwag.  Anic  mlnawa  acitackasininik 


1  Ambadac,  "would  that;"  it  is  less  frequently  used  than  ambagic  and  acpagic; 
the  last  is  the  best  of  the  three  forms. 

-  Kagri-cinagwa'k,  "would  it  look;"  that  is  the  literal  meaning;  but  the  sense 
is,  "can  it  be  possible." 


133 


1 6.   NANABUSHU  AND  THE  BUZZARD. 

And  so  he  started  away,  round  about  he  travelled. 
Now,  once  while  journeying  about,  he  looked  above  (and) 
saw  some  one  seated  upon  a  cloud.  Truly  envious  was 
he  of  him.  "Would  that  I  (could)  too,"1  he  thought,  after 
which  he  addressed  him,  saying:  "Would  you  not  come 
down,  my  little  brother?"  he  said  to  him.  Upon  which 
he  was  then  told:  "No,"  he  was  told. 

"How  would  it  look,3  (in  view  of)  as  many  as  I  have 
seen,  for  you  not  to  heed  me?" 

"Nanabushu,   I  am  afraid  of  you." 

"You  have  no  cause  to  fear  me,"  he  said  to  him.  And 
so  after  (Nanabushu)  had  deceived  him,  then  was  he  brought 
into  conversation  with  him.  "Oh,  really,  I  am  so  envious 
of  you  !  I  fancy  that  afar  must  you  be  able  to  see,"  he 
said  to  him. 

"Yes,  (that  is)  true." 

"Good,"  he  said  to  him.  Upon  which  he  then  said  to 
him:  "Pray,  let  me  bear  you  company." 

"Certainly,"  he  was  told.  Whereupon  up  they  went 
to  yonder  cloud.  And  so  when  they  started  away,  with 
the  wind  went  wafting  the  cloud.  By  and  by  hardly  was  the 
earth  to  be  seen.  Then  thoughts  concerning  him  did  the 
other  entertain.  "Apparently  he  is  ever  playing  a  trick 
on  some  one.  Now,  I  will  play  a  trick  on  him,"  (thus) 
he  thought.  Thereupon  apart  then  broke  the  cloud  by 
reason  of  the  wind.  Again  it  broke  apart  on  account  of 
the  wind ;  gradually  smaller  grew  the  space  where  they 
were.  At  last  almost  space  enough  for  them  to  sit  on 
was  how  much  that  yet  remained.  And  anon  when  it 
was  rent  asunder,  then  in  different  places  they  sat.  So 
when  again  it  blew  apart,  then  away  flew  the  other,  alight- 


134 

acipasigwa'irnit,  aciponinit  ri'wati  animi'tcanik  l  rru  ana- 
'kwat.  Midac  utanukanonan  :  "Anm  katiyan,  nicimisa?" 
ugrrnan.  Mlcigwa  klwabandank  tclpangicink.  Cigwa 
mlnawa  pa'kwayasinini  mi'i-ma  ayat;  kaga'pri'gu  piguckani. 
5  Agawa  udababandan  ucawacka'kamiganig.  Acipangicink 
a'panaTban  pabimipisut.  Cigwa  ajidababandank  atata 
ki'tcimi'tikukani  ka'i'cipangicink.  Cayigwa  ka'i'ciplndcisat 
kitcimi'tigon  wimbisinit.  Mlsa/  ka'i'cipmdcini'kisat,  misax 
acibwabwanawi'u't.  Anuwfkwatcrirt  awlya  uglnontawa, 
jo  pipapinit  i'kwawa1'',  midac  ka'i-'kitunit :  "Mlsa7  6*o'man  nin- 
gutci  andat  ka'r'kitung  wabigak,"  ilkitowac  i'i>u  ilkwawa5:. 


Acikigitut :    "  Wabigagowiyan   andayan." 

O'o'dac  i(kitowac :  "Kunugana  milkawang  ca!ja/u  wabigag, 
nicim,"  ugri'nan  mra*u  matciki'kwawis. 

15        "Kana  gin  kinontawasl?"  udigon  Ini/u  uclmayan.      "Kimi- 
lkawanan,   mawln." 

Midac  mrrma11  mlnawa  ka'i'cikanonat :  "Wabigagowiyan 
andayan,"   ugri'nan.      Midac  ka'i'cimadclkawa'u'gut. 

"Nicim,    kl'kawawank,    awagwanina  kaayanigwan   kami- 
20  lkawagwan,    mra<u  ka'irnabamit,"   ugri'nan  lni/u  uclmayan. 
Misax  cigwa  kaga't  udanuklckika'irgun. 

"Wrkagasa    i'i'ma11    tayawi   laca/u  wacima'i'mawit,"   krr- 
nandam   'au   Nanabuco. 

1   Animi'tcanik,    "where  there  was  a  bigger;1'   the  comparative  element  is  in   the 
initial  stem  ani-. 


'35 

ing  upon  yonder  place  where  there  was  a  bigger  l  cloud. 
Whereupon  in  vain  he  tried  to  speak  to  him,  saying : 
"What  will  become  of  me,  my  little  brother?"  he  said  to 
him.  So  then  he  knew  that  he  was  going  to  fall.  Then 
again  apart  flew  the  place  where  he  was ;  and  in  the  end 
it  broke  completely.  Faintly  could  he  see  the  green  of 
the  landscape.  When  he  fell,  a  long  while  was  he  falling 
through  the  air.  Now,  when  he  came  in  full  sight  (of 
the  earth,  he  saw)  how  so  dreadfully  wooded  was  the 
place  into  which  he  was  to  fall.  Then  down  he  fell  into 
a  great  tree  that  was  hollow.  Thereupon,  when  he  had 
dropped  into  the  hollow,  then  was  he  unable  (to  get  out). 
While  vainly  trying  (to  get  out,)  he  heard  some  one,  those 
were  women  2  coming  laughing ;  and  this  was  what  they 
were  saying:  "Now,  somewhere  hereabouts  lives  a  Gray 
Porcupine,  so  they  say,"  said  the  women. 

Then  up  he  spoke,  saying:  "I  am  the  Gray  Porcupine 
that  dwells  here." 

And  this  they  said:  "Suppose  we  should  find  the  Gray 
Porcupine,  my  little  sister,"  to  the  other  said  she  that 
was  older.3 

"And  did  you  not  hear  him?"  she  was  asked  by  her 
little  sister.  "We  have  found  him,  maybe." 

And  so  what  he  said  before,  he  said  to  them  again  : 
"I  am  the  Gray  Porcupine  that  dwells  (here),"  he  said  to 
them.  Whereupon  they  began  felling  the  tree  he  was  in. 

"My  little  sister,  when  we  have  felled  the  tree,  then  who 
soever  is  there,  (and)  whichever  the  one  that  finds  him,  she 
will  be  the  one  to  have  him  for  a  husband,"  she  said  to  her 
little  sister.  And  so  they  truly  chopped  away  unavailingly. 

"I  wish  the  younger  one  would  be  there,"  thought 
Nanabushu. 

2  The  Foolish  Maiden  and  her  younger  sister,  sisters  of  Nanabushu. 

3  The  confusion  of  the  subject  of  a  question,  as  here,  is  common. 


1 36 

Cigwasa  utackika'irgon  rru  nantuga/irgut,  plnic  matci- 
ki'kwawis  ka'kina  ka'plguga'a'nk ;  mi'sa  ka/rcigwlnawaba- 
mat.  Misa  a11  ilkwa  waclmamawit  iiman  ayat  kaga'pi 
ka'i'cipo^kwisitot  ri-u  uwaga'kwat. 

5        "Nicim,"  udinan  alpl  kapo'kwisitonit  lisi/u  uwaga'kwatoni  • 
"Misa  mn  tci'irnabamiyan,"   ugrrnan  Ini/u  uclmayan. 

"Wa'kagasa  kaya  win."      O'O'dac  kri'nandam  :   "Amba- 

sano,    mlyatagu    abiding    tcibiyapagitot    lisi/u    uwaga'kwat," 

udinaniman.     Aci'a-cowinat ;  cigwa  gaga't  udackika'irgon  ; 

10  acipasiguntcisat.      Nanabucowan  !ni/u  undcipasiguntcisawan, 

anigagawa'piwan.      "Kaga'tigu  wapigak  andat  inantamog !" 


Misa  kanicimamadcat  Nanabucu.  "Amantcigic  ka'i'cic- 
tcigawanan,"  kri'nandam ;  "wawiyac  tcitotawak  kayii  win?" 
udinaniman  lni/u  pinasiwan.  Acimadablt  saga'i'gan,  midac 
15  i:rrman  micawi'kwam  ka'i'ci'U'cicink.  "Ambasano,  ninga'a'- 
mugok  anotc,  pinasiwag,"  kri'nandam.  Uwlckwatiiniman 
Ini/u  wawiyac  ka'totagut.  Cigwa  kaga't  udamugo8  antegwa^ 
anotcisagu  pinasiwa8.  Midac  ka/rnat :  "Kagux  win  i'i'witi 
nintciting  ttntamici'kagun, 


20  Midac  kaga't  ka*i*cictciganit,  anlc  panagu  gatanwavva- 
'tonit.  Cigwasa  uwabaman  upabamasimonunit  mi/u  pinasi 
wan.  utAic,  mlsa  kawm  prrcasiwan !"  anlc  uwl'kwatiiniman 
tcipicanit.  Ackamigu  tasing  kacigatinigin  paconagusiwan, 
kaga'pi  aciponinit ;  nagawasagu  fci'i'witi  pangicink  utonsa- 


137 

Now,  (the  women)  began  splitting  a  tree  in  an  effort  to 
find  him,1  (keeping  it  up)  till  the  elder  sister  had  it  all  in 
pieces;  but  she  had  failed  to  find  him.  And  then  the  younger 
woman  yonder,  where  she  was,  finally  broke  her  axe. 

"My  little  sister,"  (the  elder  sister)  said  to  her  after  she 
had  broken  her  axe,  "so  it  will  be  I  who  will  have  a 
husband,"  she  said  to  her  little  sister. 

"Would  the  same  happen  to  her  too!"  And  this  he 
thought:  "Now,  would  that  only  once  she  might  strike 
(the  tree)  with  her  axe,"  was  the  thought  he  had  of  her. 
Then  he  watched  for  her ;  presently  was  the  tree  really 
split  up  by  her ;  then  up  he  leaped.  And  there  was 
Nanabushu  leaping  away,  falling  headlong  with  laughter 
as  he  went.  "That  it  actually  was  the  home  of  a  Gray 
Porcupine  they  thought !" 

And  so  upon  his  way  continued  Nanabushu.  "I  wonder 
what  I  shall  do,"  he  thought,  "in  order  that  I  may  play 
a  trick  on  him  too !"  such  was  his  thought  of  the  bird. 
When  he  came  out  upon  a  lake,  then  far  out  there  on 
the  ice  he  went  and  lay  down.  "Now,  I  shall  be  eaten 
by  all  kinds  of  birds,"  he  willed.  He  formed  a  scheme 
to  get  the  one  that  had  done  him  a  trick.  Then  truly 
was  he  eaten  by  crows  and  by  various  kinds  of  birds. 
Then  this  he  said  to  them:  "Don't  you  eat  upon  me 
yonder  at  my  buttocks,"  he  said  to  them. 

Whereupon  truly  such  was  what  they  did,  and  a  con 
tinuous  din  did  they  keep  up.  At  last  he  then  saw  the 
bird  sailing  about  through  the  air.  "Alas,  he  is  not  coming!" 
for  he  longed  in  his  mind  for  him  to  come.  Gradually 
as  the  days  came  and  went,  nearer  it  could  be  seen,  till 
at  last  it  then  alighted ;  and  a  good  way  off  from  yonder 
place  where  it  came  down  was  (Nanabushu)  observed. 

1  This  passage  is  in  the  passive,  with  "Nanabushu"  as  subject;  but  in  the  trans 
lation  it  is  turned  about,  with  "him"  as  object,  and  "the  women"  as  subject. 


138 

bamigon.  Midac  kaga/t  a'pidci  ugusigon.  Tcigwasa  w!kka 
upinasi'kagon.  Acipa'kiwagit,  iicikwackwackwaninit.  Midac 
tcigwa  ackamigu  kawin  tontanslwan  l  kaga'prrgu  uwawan- 
gawanimigon.  Kaga'prrgu  owi'kitowan  :  "Aninta  glnawa 
untamasiwao-  o'o'witi  wminwa^uclo-anat?"  Mlsa  oraora't  lrr- 

O  O    •  C)       O 

witi  wantamigut.     Cigwa  ackamigu  wasa  iciplndi'kwanuwan 
utclting,   kaga'pigu   kawin  sagiti'kwanislwan. 


Acipasiguntcisat  kackitiyantamawat   lifii/u  uctigwanini. 

"Micanim  Nanabucu,  ninglgagwanisagi'rk !" 
10  Madclpa'tot  lici/u  saga'i'gan.  Anlc  anupimiwrkwatci'irnit. 
Misax  cigwa  pacwabandank  wa'kwagamiwaninik  i'i<u  saga- 
'i'gan  acipagitcitiyamat,  mldac  ka'i'cipangicininit  iman 
mi'tcaya'r.3  Midac  ka'i'nat :  "Winangii  kiga'i'go  tcra'ni- 
•a-'klwang,"  ugri'nan.  "Klgawlnanimik  'a11  anicinaba." 


17.   NANABUSHU  PRETENDS  TO  BE  A  WOMAN. 

15  Misa/  anrrcimadcat  papimusat.  Misax  ugltabi'tawa8 
i'kwawa^  manisanit ;  anlc  uglmi'tawa8 :  "Amantcigic  ka'ijic- 
tciga-irngubanan  tciwltigamank  4aea/u  inini?"  i'kitowa1''. 
"Ambasano,  wawiyac  ningatotawag  awagwaniwigwanag," 
krrnandam  Nanabucu.  Ugi'kaniman  kamawinit  wagwi- 

20  sisinit.  Midac  ka/rciwawaci'irt  ka-i'ci'i-'kwa'kasut.  Midac 
adi'ko-u-blnisagusm  mldac  Ini/u  ka'a'wa'tcigat  ri-u  i'kwang. 

1   Ackamigu    kawin    to"tanslwan,    "it  gradually  became  less  afraid;"   literally,   "it 
gradually  did  it  less,"   that   is  keeping  up  its  fear. 

-  Mi'tcaya-r,   "on  the  ice;"   literally,   "on  the  firm." 


139 

And  it  was  true  that  much  was  he  feared  (by  the  bird). 
Then  after  a  while  to  where  he  was  came  (the  bird).  As 
he  raised  the  muscle  on  his  calf,  away  went  the  other 
hopping.  And  then  presently  it  gradually  became  less 
afraid,1  till  at  last  (Nanabushu)  was  made  free  and  easy 
with.  Then  finally  this  it  said:  "Why  do  you  not  eat 
of  him  from  the  small  of  the  back,  where  he  is  fat?" 
Thereupon  truly  from  that  place  was  he  eaten.  Presently 
farther  into  the  anus  yonder  it  put  its  neck,  then  at  last 
it  did  not  take  its  neck  out  from  there. 

Then  up  he  sprang  closing  his  anus  tight  over  the 
other's  hand. 

"Confound  Nanabushu,  by  him  am  I  frightfully  treated!" 
While  (Nanabushu)  went  running  along  the  lake,  naturally 
the  other  tried  in  vain  to  get  free.  And  then  presently, 
when  nearing  the  far  end  of  the  lake,  (Nanabushu)  freed 
(the  bird)  from  his  anus,  whereupon  down  it  fell  on  the 
ice.2  And  this  was  what  he  said  to  it :  "  Buzzard  shall 
you  be  called  till  the  end  of  the  world,"  he  said  to  it. 

"For  your  filth   will  you   be  loathed  by  the  people." 

-t 

17.   NANABUSHU  PRETENDS  TO  BE  A  WOMAN. 

And  then  away  he  started  upon  his  journey,  travelling 
afoot.  And  so  he  came  within  the  sound  of  some  women 
who  were  gathering  fire-wood  ;  now  he  secretly  overheard 
them  saying:  "(I)  wonder  how  we  can  bring  it  to  pass 
so  that  we  can  marry  that  man!"  they  said.  "Now,  a 
trick  I  am  going  to  play  on  them,  whoever  they  are," 
thought  Nanabushu.  He  knew  that  the  mother  (of  the 
man)  would  cry.  And  so  he  got  into  gay  attire  after  he 
had  taken  on  the  form  of  a  woman.  There  was  a  caribou 
spleen  which  he  turned  into  a  woman's  thing.  After  he  had 
taken  on  the  form  (of  a  woman),  (and)  after  he  had  gone 


140 

Ka*rcinagwirirt,  ka/rcinasi'kawat  H*u  i'kwawa8,  o'o'widac 
ugri'na8  a'pika/irdisat :  "Anmti  ayat  'a8a/u  inini  cinganimat 
48i/u  ilkwawa8  ka/rnint?"  Midac  ka/rgut :  "Mrirma11  nawo- 
tana  ayat,"  ugrrgo8.  "Gagwanisagisi,  antugwan  tci'i'nan- 
5  dank." 

"Tagackuma,  awrrni'k,"  udina^';  "'Ninbi'i'cinica'irgo  ninl- 
gri'gok,'"   udinac  iu  i'kwawa8. 

Misax  kaga't  ka/i'ciklwat  pacik,  ka'i'ciwlndamawint  wat:a/u 

mindimonya    wagusisit.      A'kitut    Ca8a/u    i'kwa  mayatcra'tci- 

10   mut :  "  Plwita  oman  aya."      Odac  i'kito  :  "  Nimbri'cinica'U'go 

ninlgri'gok,"    i'kito.      "Midac  ka'plcimadcinica'irt,   lawitiba- 

tcimun,'  nintik.    Nicagwanim.    'Tabicawag  nintangwaiyag.'" 


Midac  a'kitut  'a11  mintimoya:  "Anin  dac  c^i'u  antawa- 
bamasiwak,"  utina8  ciK'i/u  udanisa8. 

15  Midac  kaga't  pa-rcinantawabamawat  !gi/u  i'kwawag, 
mlsax  ka'i'klwawitciwawat  lgi/u  i'kwawag.  Midac  ka/rcrcr- 
nota'i'nt  iwiti  wantapinit  Ini/u  niniwan.  Mlsa7  cigwax  ki'u*- 
napamit.  Cigwa  uwlcama8  utangwaya8  tclmanisawat.  Anlc 
atcinagu  kimamatwa'i-gawan,  aca  nibiwa  misan.  "Awanan 

20  dac  lau  mamindaga  kajincawisit?"  utinawan,  uwlntamawawan 
ugiwan.  "Kagatsa  klcincawisl  'a8a/u  nintangwanan." 


1   The   woman   impersonated  by  Nanabushu. 

'2   A  woman   to   whom  the  message  had  been  given.  3  The  woman-hater. 

4  The    formality    of  leading    a   daughter  to  that  part  of  the  lodge  where  a  man 


HI 

over  to  where  the  women  were,  this  he  then  saicl  to  them 
when  he  came  upon  them:  "Where  is  the  man  who  is 
said  to  be  a  hater  of  women  ?"  Whereupon  he  was  told  : 
"Here  in  the  centre  of  the  town  he  is,"  he  was  told. 
"  He  is  hopelessly  impossible,  it  is  uncertain  what  his 
feeling  would  be  (concerning"  you)." 

"Then  pray,  do  you  go  and  give  him  a  message,"  he 
said  to  them;  "'I  have  been  sent  hither  by  my  parents,'" 
he  said  to  the  women. 

And  so  truly,  when  back  one  (of  them)  went,  then  was 
the  old  woman  who  was  mother  (to  the  man)  given  the 
message.  Then  said  the  woman  who  had  conveyed  the 
message:  "A  stranger  is  here."  And  this  she  said:  "I 
have  been  sent  hither  by  my  parents,"  she  saicl.  "And 
so  when  I  was  set  upon  my  way  hitherward,  'Go  give 
the  news,'  I  was  told.  I  was  loath  (to  go).  'Let  my 
friends  come  hither,'  (said  the  woman  T)." 

Thereupon  said  the  old  woman :  2  "  Why  do  you  not 
go  look  for  her  ?"  1  she  said  to  her  daughters. 

And  so  truly  came  the  women  seeking  for  her,  where 
upon  back  home  the  women  went,  taking  her  l  with  them. 
And  then  a  place  was  made  for  her  there  where  the  man  * 
was  seated.  Therefore  she a  now  had  a  husband.4  By 
and  by  she  wished  her  sisters-in-law  to  go  with  her  to 
gather  fire-wood.5  So  in  a  little  while  after  the  sound  of 
her  chopping  was  heard,  already  (was  there)  much  fire 
wood.  "W7ho  is  she  that  is  such  a  remarkable  worker?" 
they  said  to  their  mother,  they  said  to  her,  telling  her 
about  it.  "Truly  a  good  worker  is  our  sister-in-law."6 

seats  himself,  and  having  her  seat  herself  by  him,  is  the  public  announcement  that 
she  is  his  wife. 

5  One    of   the    first    things    a    bride    does    is    to  go  for  fire-wood  or  for  water,  a 
convention  by  which  she  enters  her  new  station. 

6  A   pleasing  compliment   which  a  wife  enjoys  is  to  hear  it  said  of  her  that  she 
is  a  good  worker. 


142 

Anlc  kagatsa  minwantam  'afia/u  minclimoya,  kaya  la^a/u 
a'kiwa^zi  kicincawisinit  una'a/ngani'kwamiwan.  Mldac 
ka/rcikanonat  wabicaciwan :  "Ambasano  wlto'kawicin  o'o* 
acictcigayan,"  ugrrnan.  Mldac  Ini/u  ka'trnltcanisit ;  o'6'wi- 
dac  ugi'i'nan :  "Ambasano,  monjag  maw^n,"  ugri'nan. 
Mldac  kaga/t  ka'i'cictciganit,  ta'kubinat  acictcigat  mlya/ta 
skljignning  saga'pinat;  ta^kubinat  pimumawisut. 


Misagu'pana  mawinit. 

"Wo'o'widac    i'kidun,"    ugrrnan.       '"Tagwagicop    niwl- 
10   -a'mwa,'  i'kitun   *i8i/u  tcimamawiyan,"  ugri'nan. 

Mldac  kaga/t  anwat  'asa/u  abinodci.  "Tagwagicop  ni- 
wra'mwa !"  inwat. 

Caylgwa  nisitu'tawa.  Anlc  cigwa  sagitowan  usinisan, 
anlc  ugimawiwan;  poltc  kicitciganit  ('fi/u  anicinaba  ka'i^kltut 
15  'asa/u  a'kiwanzl.  "Anlc,  anicinabatug,  a'kitut  wasa/u  nocica11, 
'tagwagicop  niwra-mwa,'"  i'kito.  Mlclac  kaga't  ka'plcimi- 
nint  Nanabucu  tagwagicopln.  Pisa  alp!  ka'irnicicininik 
madcit. 


Midac    wawitigamat    mi/u    ininiwan,   cigwa  ugi^waniman 

20  pigickananinit  Ini/u  ublnisagusln.     Mldac  kigiciip  aca  nama- 

dapiwan    ucinisan    kaya    uzikusisan    mlsa   cigwa  ki'kanimat 


143 

Now,  thoroughly  pleased  was  the  old  woman,  as  was 
also  the  old  man,  that  such  a  good  worker  was  their 
daughter-in-law.1  And  then  she  (Nanabushu)  addressed 
the  Marten,  saying:  "I  wish  you  would  help  me  in  this 
that  I  am  undertaking,"  she  said  to  it.  And  so  that  was 
the  creature  she  had  for  child ;  and  this  she  said  to  it : 
"Come,  now,  all  the  while  do  you  cry,"  she  said  to  it. 
And  that  truly  was  what  (the  Marten)  did.  When  she  had 
it  strapped  to  the  cradle-board,  her  arrangement  was  such 
that  she  had  it  bound  up  as  far  as  over  the  eyes ;  with 
it  bound  to  the  cradle-board,  she  played  the  nurse  carrying 
it  about  on  her  back. 

And  so  all  the  while  did  (the   Marten)  weep. 

"Now,  this  do  you  say,"  she  said  to  it.  "'Some  tender 
loin  do  I  wish  to  eat,'  do  you  say,  so  that  you  may  cry," 
she  said  to  it. 

And  that  truly  was  what  the  infant  cried.  "Some 
tenderloin  do  I  want  to  eat !"  it  cried. 

Presently  they  understood  what  it  wanted.  Now,  then 
out  went  her  father-in-law  to  cry  aloud,  for  he  was  chief; 
for  of  necessity  were  the  people  bound  to  do  whatever 
the  old  man  should  say.  "Now,  O  ye  people!  thus  says 
my  grandchild,  'Some  tenderloin  do  I  want  to  eat,' "  he 
said.  And  so  truly  was  Nanabushu  given  some  tenderloin. 
It  hushed  when  it  was  given  something  good  to  eat. 

And  so  while  she  (Nanabushu)  continued  living  (as  a 
wife)  with  the  man,  she  then  became  aware  that  the  spleen 
was  decaying.  And  so  one  morning,  while  her  father-in- 
law  and  mother-in-law  were  seated,  she  then  began  to 
realize  that  she  was  becoming  rotten  between  the  loins. 

1  Pleased  because  their  maintenance  is  assured.  A  son  is  seldom  encouraged  to 
marry  a  woman  simply  because  she  is  handsome  or  that  she  is  of  a  pleasing  dis 
position  ;  but  if  she  can  work,  if  she  can  turn  her  hands  to  something  useful,  then 
she  is  the  one  for  him  to  get.  Behind  all  this  is  the  desire  of  the  old  folks  to  be 
cared  for  in  their  old  age. 


144 
pioickanitcitca'kamat.       "Piso,"    i'kitowan    ucinisan.      "Wa- 

i    o  • 

gunanta  ka'i'cimagwa'k?"  i'kitowan   ucinisan. 

Kaga't  mamitawantam ;  acipasigwlt,  anira'nicikaskabanit. 
Acipangicimat  ucinisan  anasamabinit,  acimadclpa^tod.    "Ka- 
i;kwa  inantamogf !"  i'kitowan   Nanabucowan. 

o 


1 8.  NANABUSHU  SLAYS  TOAD-WOMAN,  THE  HEALER 
OF  THE  MANITOUS. 

Misar     anicimaclcat     minawa     Nanabucu,     anipapimusat 

minawa.       Mldac    ka'i'nandank :     "Mlmawin    kl'pomagwan 

kama'kamit     nintociman.       Mlsax     cigwa     tci'a'ntunawag." 

Misa'    kaga't    nantunaSvat,   ningutingigu  awiya  onontawan 

10  naeamunit : 

.  o  . 

"Piya'kwa  nimbicinawicin  ca"." 
Mlsa7  nasi'tawat,   misa7  undcita  ani'tawat : 

"Piya'kwa  nimbicinawicin  ca"." 

Tcigwa    uwabaman,    kunigimn    uma'ka'kln    uclclgwanini 
15   ayaconingwawanit.      Acikanonat :   "Anin  no'ko  anln  anano- 
'klyan?"   udinan. 

"Ka;    ninantawikubl.       Nanabucu    uglpimwan    ugimam- 
cipicln." 

Mldac  anat :    "Anic  wa'totaman  Ini/u  wlgupln?" 


20        "  Ka,    Nanabucu    wmantuwa'pi'kana.      Kanabatc    klnisa- 


H5 

"Phew!"  said  her  father-in-law.    "What  is  that  which  smells 
so  ?"  said  her  father-in-law. 

Truly  was  she  worried  about  it.  When  she  rose  to  her 
feet,  in  vain  she  tried  to  keep  it  from  falling.  When  she 
dropped  it  in  front  of  where  her  father-in-law  was  seated, 
then  away  she  started  running.  "Truly  a  real  woman 
they  thought!"  said  Nanabushu. 

1 8.  NANABUSHU  SLAYS  TOAD-WOMAN,  THE  HEALER 
OF  THE  MANITOUS.1 

And  then  on  his  way  continued  Nanabushu,  on  his  way 
he  continued  walking.  Now,  this  was  what  he  thought : 
"Perchance  he  thinks  he  is  free  who  robbed  me  of  my 
nephew.  The  time  has  now  come  for  me  to  look  for  him." 
Thereupon  truly,  while  seeking  for  him,  he  suddenly  heard 
some  one  singing : 

"From  the  ends  of  the  earth  do  I  come  with  the  sound  of  my  rattles,  sha"." 

And  so  when  he  went  to  where  it  was  sounding,  it 
seemed  as  if  he  heard  the  same  sound  as  before  : 

"From  the  ends  of  the  earth  do  I  come  with  the  sound  of  my  rattles,  sha"." 

Presently  he  saw  the  being ;  lo,  it  was  a  toad  with  her 
rattle  hanging  under  one  arm  from  the  other  shoulder. 
Then  he  addressed  her,  saying :  "  What,  my  grandmother, 
what  are  you  working  at?"  he  said  to  her. 

"  Why,  I  am  seeking  for  some  bast.  Nanabushu  has 
shot  the  chief  of  the  big  lynxes." 

And  so  he  said  to  her :  "  What  are  you  going  to  do 
with  the  bast?" 

"Why,  an  attempt  will  be  made  to  ensnare  Nanabushu. 
Perhaps  he  may  be  drowned,  for  almost  flooded  was  this 

1   For  other  versions  see  Nos.   32  and  46. 

10 — PUBL.    AMER.    ETHN.    SOC.    VOL.    VII. 


146 


bawatug,  anlc  kini'kibl  kaga  wcro*  a'ki.    Amnti  dac  ka/irn- 
dcipimatisit  ?  i'kitowag." 

"Amn    guta    win    wantcitotawawat    klma'kamawat    Ini/u 
utocimini?   Manitosa  win,  ninawint  anangit  laca/u  Nanabucu. 

5        "Wa,   nocis,  kin   inawin   Nanabucu." 

"Ka,     noma'i'tkana     kltaglnlwana'u^k    ^a^a^1    Nanabucu 
awiyamban.      Anin,   no'ko,   a'i'ci'a'yat   lasa/u  ga'pimunt?" 


wi-a*nan." 


Ka,     kagasagu     ninotcimo'a'nan,     nmawint    ninananta- 
i'nan." 
10        "No'ko,  anm  i'ku   ana-a'man   nanantawi-a't?" 

"Aye2,  misagu  ana'a'man,   o'o*   kabi'a'i'na'a'man  : 

"Piya'kwa  nimbicinawicin  can." 

Anlc    owlnga    ugagwatciman    owlngadac    uwlndamagon, 

kaya  rrma11   a'pl  wandabinit  8i*i'u  rianantawi'i'wanit,  midac 

15   kaya  ima  andanit.     "  IckwayaiRIgu  nintamin.     Nlciwag  noci- 

sanyag,"  udigon.     Awlnga  oki^kino'a'magon,  ka'kina  uglki- 

'kincra-magon. 

Midac  a;pl  ka'i'cinlwana^wat,  ka'i'cipa'kunat.     Midac  ka- 
•ixipisi'kaw^at,    ka'i'ciklckipinat   pangl  ima  utclngwaniming. 
20  Midac   ka'i'combiwanat  Ini/u  wlgupln,   midac  ana*a-nk  ana- 
•a'minit  ani'a-ntcikwaskwanit : 

"Piyit'kwa  nimbicinawicin  caV 
Anlc  mlgu  siu  anri'nwat  anra/ntcikwaskwanit.      Cayigwa 


earth  with  water.  And  in  what  place  can  he  now  be 
alive?  they  said." 

"Now,  what  was  their  purpose  that  they  should  deprive 
him  of  his  nephew?  He  is  really  a  manitou,  so  we  claim 
Nanabushu  to  be." 

"Ah,   my  grandson!   you  must  be  Nanabushu  (himself)." 

"Why,  long  since  would  you  have  been  clubbed  to 
death  if  I  had  been  Nanabushu.  How,  my  grandmother, 
is  the  one  doing  that  was  shot?" 

"Oh,  nearly  now  have  we  healed  him,  we  ourselves  are 
giving  him  treatment."  l 

"My  grandmother,  how  do  you  usually  sing  while  you 
are  giving  him  treatment?" 

"Ay,  this  is  the  way  I  sing,  this  was  how  I  sang  while 
coming  hitherward  : 

"From  the  ends  of  the  earth  do  I  come  with  the  sound  of  my  rattles,  sha'1." 

Now,  quite  everything  he  asked  her,  and  quite  everything 
he  was  told,  even  the  place  where  she  sat  when  she  gave 
her  treatment,  likewise  the  place  where  she  lived  (in  the 
wigwam).  "In  one  corner  of  the  place  do  we  live.  Two 
are  my  grandchildren,"  he  was  told.  Concerning  everything 
was  he  taught,  concerning  all  things  was  he  instructed. 

And  so  after  he  had  clubbed  her  to  death,  he  flayed 
her.  And  when  he  got  into  (the  skin),  he  tore  a  small 
opening  there  at  its  head.  And  now,  when  he  had  lifted 
the  bast  upon  his  back,  he  then  sang  the  way  she  sang 
when  she  went  hopping  along : 

"From  the  ends  of  the  earth  do  I  come  with  the  sound  of  my  rattles,  sha11." 
Now,  such  was  the  sound  of  his  voice  as  he  went  hopping 

1  By  conjuring  with  bones  and  flat,  circular  skin  rattles  loaded  with  pebbles; 
the  bones  to  be  swallowed  to  give  knowledge  concerning  the  cause  of  illness,  and 
the  rattle  to  bring  one's  power  into  action. 


148 

utababandan  mrrman  andanit.  Cigwa  aninasi'kank  aciwani- 
cink  pa'kanatinik  wlgiwam;  anicinasi'kank  sagitciparrtawa^. 
"No'ko,  o'O'ma11  kuca  andayang." 


"Kaga't." 
5        "Amn  win,   no'ko,   ka/irndciwanicinan?" 

"Ka,  kanagu'ku  awlnga  gaglbwabimoyan,  mldac  i*i'/u 
kawln  nlsababandanzin  Wu  antayang.  Intawa,  nocisitug, 
icisagini'kaniciyu'k."  Mldac  kaga't  ka'u'nabit,  anic  migu 
iman  antaci'kanit  wagitcitclngwan  isi/u  abinotclya51.  Cigwa 
10  umi'kawabamigo  lipi'man  kinanigic  kawat  Ini/u  udoma'ka'kf- 
wayanan.  "Wa,  no'ko,  anicinabawacaga-a'nk  kigri-na- 


caga'i 


"  Nya,  nocis,  kana  mri/>u  alposoyan  !ni/u  wigupin  ici^ka- 
man  kagabagljik  pimina'kwataman,"  utina{:  i'i*11  ocici^'ya^. 

15  Mldac  pru-t  tcibisagaswa'i-nt.  Cigwa  unagucinini.  Cayigwa 
kaga't  pldawacinon,  cigwa  plta'pabiwan.  "No'ko,  awisaga- 
swan,"  pri-'kitowan.  Mldac  kaga't  anicimadcat.  Cayigwa 
udababandan  4fii/u  andanit,  uglwabaman  odociman  kibi- 
ckwanta'i'gawint.  Mlgux  *i*u  anawi  aci'a'Inabinit,  kagagu 

20  mawi.  Anicagu  antagantasik  kawln  untcimawisl  acipindigat. 
Tcigwa  ka'irnabit,  awaniban  kawabamat. 


Adcikackikibitani,  midac  iwiti  ayanit.  Cayigwa  nanan- 
tawri'wawa*  kanawabamat,  pana'ku  iwiti  awasaya*!'. 
Cayigwa  kaya  win  uwlnanantawi'a'n.  Klca  ugrirci'ton 


149 

along  in  a  newly  changed  form.  Presently  he  came  in 
sight  of  the  place  where  (the  manitous)  lived.  When  on 
his  way  to  the  place,  he  lost  the  way  (and)  came  to  a 
different  wigwam ;  while  on  his  way  to  it,  (he  saw  some 
children)  coming  racing  out.  "O  my  grandmother!  why, 
here  is  where  we  live." 

"Indeed." 

"Pray,  how,  my  grandmother,  came  you  to  lose  the  way?" 

"Oh,  by  reason  of  too  much  weeping  have  my  eyes 
become  closed,  and  that  is  why  I  cannot  clearly  see  where 
we  live.  Therefore,  O  my  grandchildren !  do  you  lead 
me  thither  by  the  hand."  Whereupon  truly,  after  he  was 
seated,  then  there  upon  his  lap  played  the  children.  Then 
was  it  discovered  where  he  had  ripped  an  opening  in  that 
toad-skin  of  his.  "Why,  my  grandmother,  like  the  skin 
of  a  human  being  is  the  look  of  your  skin  !" 

"Ah,  my  grandchild !  that  was  how  I  rubbed  myself 
when  working  with  the  bast,  as  throughout  the  whole  of 
every  day  I  was  making  twine,"  she  said  to  her  grand 
children.  And  then  he  waited  to  be  asked  to  where  the 
smoking  was  being  held.  Already  was  the  evening  coming 
on.  Then  he  truly  heard  the  sound  of  footsteps  approach 
ing.  Presently  some  one  came  and  peeped  inside.  "My 
grandmother,  come  and  smoke,"  (the  person)  came  saying. 
Whereupon  truly  then  away  he  went.  Now,  when  he  was 
come  in  sight  of  where  they  dwelt,  he  saw  that  his  nephew 
was  used  as  a  cover  over  the  entry-way.  Even  yet  he 
could  see  it,  and  he  almost  wept.  By  reason  solely  of 
his  power  to  control  his  feelings  was  why  he  did  not  cry 
when  entering.  Then,  after  he  was  seated,  there  was  no 
one  for  him  to  see. 

There  was  a  hanging  partition  dividing  the  room,  and 
there  beyond  was  (the  wounded).  Then,  as  they  began 
ministering,  he  kept  watch  of  them,  and  continuously  round 


150 

4Eiman  wa'pra-'pa'i'wat,  mi'tigo8  ugra-'kwakwa'pina^ 
Mldac  cigwa  kaya  win  anrrcat  Wwiti  awasaya'i',  cigwa 
owabaman  asota'kwa-i'gasunit.  A'pidci  waca/pmit  sangan- 
gasininik  liei/u  ubigwa'k.  Wawanigu  udoninan  acicicigwa- 
5  nawat. 


"  Micanim  Nanabucu  !      Misa  nicit!"  i'kito. 
Pasigwintcisat    Nanabucu    udanimamipinan    otocimiwaya- 
nan,    madclba'i-wat.      Unsusama'kamik   kapiyapitcipitwavva- 
tciwaninik  igu,   anigu'k  pimipa'to.     Ackamigu  a'kupiski'klt 
10  a'kwa-a'm.      Mi    yanawi    cigwa   pacwantank    48i/u   omisonu- 
'kan,  caylgwa  upacwabandan  ciKi/u  omisonu'kan.      Mi  cigwa 
axkukitcipisut  a'kwa'a'ng  aciposit   'ici/u  omisomu^kan. 


Acini'kipmit  i*i*u  mi'tigo8,  misax  a'pana  kagalt  unawandan 
wasa  anamindim  a(ki  ayanik.  Owabama  ayanit  pamataganit 

15  anotc  awaslya5'.  Misa  wlposiwa55  lic>i'man  utclmaning,  m!sa/ 
acrkunlcawat.  "Pa'ka,"  udina8.  "Panima  pica'kag,"  udinas:. 
Misa  cigwa  krrnandank :  "Anln  kacictcigayan  awagwan 
kabltot  c\Ki'u  a'ki?"  kri'nandam.  Cigwa  ugi'kanona55  li{:i/u 
manitowanca,  midac  nictam  nigigwan :  "Kawlnina  kltanasi- 

20  lkansln   'i8i/u  a'ki?"  udinan. 


Misa  gaga't  ka'i'cigoglnit.  Ningutingigu  awayat  krirn- 
dci*a-pockandcisawan,  kanisabawanigwan.  Ka'i'cipabwata- 
nat,  ka'i'cigagwatcimat :  "Anm?"  ugri'nan. 


to  the  other  side  (of  the  partition  they  kept  passing). 
Presently  he  too  began  ministering  to  him.  In  advance 
had  he  made  ready  the  way  by  which  he  meant  to  flee, 
some  wood  he  had  heaped  in  a  pile.  And  so  when 
presently  he  too  went  round  to  the  other  side,  he  then 
saw  him  who  sat  propped  with  a  support  at  the  back. 
Right  in  his  side  was  the  feather  of  the  arrow  barely  to 
be  seen.  And  with  a  careful  grip  he  held  it  as  he  worked 
it  vigorously  back  and  forth. 

"Confound  Nanabushu!     Now  he  is  killing  me!"  he  said. 

Springing  to  his  feet,  Nanabushu  seized  the  skin  of  his 
nephew  as  he  went,  (and)  started  in  flight.  Frightful  was 
the  roar  of  the  water  that  came  pursuing  after,  at  top 
speed  he  ran.  Then  by  degrees  till  up  to  the  knee  in 
water  was  he  wading.  When  truly,  now,  he  thought  he 
was  nigh  to  his  raft,  then  near  by  did  he  see  his  raft. 
When  up  to  his  waist  he  was  wading  in  water,  then  he 
went  aboard  his  raft. 

When  the  water  overflowed  the  trees,  then  at  once  he 
truly  realized  what  a  long  way  clown  in  the  water  the 
earth  was.  He  saw  all  kinds  of  game-folk  swimming 
around.  And  when  they  wished  to  go  aboard  his  raft, 
he  kept  them  off.  "Wait,"  he  said  to  them.  "Not  till 
after  a  while  do  you  come,"  he  said  to  them.  And  so 
he  then  thought:  "How  shall  I  do  (to  select)  what  one 
is  to  fetch  some  earth?"  he  thought.  Presently  he  spoke 
to  the  smaller  animal-folk,1  and  so  the  first  was  the  Otter  : 
"Would  you  not  go  after  some  earth?"  he  said  to  him. 

Thereupon  truly  down  into  the  water  (the  Otter)  dived. 
And  by  and  by  the  one  that  had  gone  down  came  up 
out  of  the  water  dead,  he  must  have  drowned.  When 
(Nanabushu)  had  breathed  upon  him,  then  he  asked  him: 
"Well?"  he  said  to  him. 

1  Such  as  wolves,  foxes,  beavers,  badgers,  minks,  hares,  and  the  like. 


152 

"Mlgu  4si/u  tababamagwaban  Igi/u  mi'tigog  piwa'kwana- 
'kisiwat,  mldac  a'pl  ka-rciwanantaman." 

"Taga,  km,  amick  nasi'kan   lisi/u  a'ki." 

Kaga't  ka/i'cigogit  laea/u  ami'k.  Tcigwa'  minawa  kl'a'- 
5  bockantcisawan.  Acipabwatanat,  "Anln?"  udinan.  "Kawl- 
nina  kanaga  klbacwabandanz!naban  ?" 

"Kaga't  abi'tawa'tig  mi'tigog  nintayanaban,  mldac  ka-r- 
ciwanantaman." 

"  Aba'pinisiwagan,"  udinan. 
10        "Taga,  kin,   wajack." 

Mldac  kaga^t  acikoglt  laca/u  wajack.  Cigwa  abockan- 
tcisawan.  Aciwuta'pinat  ugikacka'kunitcantamini,  a'i'tawi- 
ni'k  uda'kunamini  ;ifc'i/u  alki ;  kaya  usitaning,  a'T'tawisit 
usitaning  a'tani  'I1''!'11  a'ki. 

15  "Anlc  misa  4i:i/u  tcikackitoyang  tci'O'ci'toyang  cPi/u  a'ki," 
ugina^.  Anic  ml  cigwa  klpoclatank  lifii/u  alki,  ackamigu 
kimistcani,  ackam  kl-aji'tot.  Anic  migu  ka'i'cictcigat. 
Cigwa  ajiki'kandank  ackam  mistcanig,  o'6'widac  kriftkito  : 
"Taga,  ma'rngan,  wabandan  anigu^kwagwan,"  udinan 

20  ma'I'nganan  ka/a'nonat. 

Mldac  kaga't  ka'i'cimadcanit,   mldac  ka/rcitagwicininit. 

"Kawlnisa  tanigu'kwasinon,"  kri-nandam.      "Usam  ta/a'- 
gasin."     Mldac    ka'i'cictcigat    minawa    nawatc   tcimistcanig, 
mldac    minawa    kacri'nat :    "Taga,  wabandan   minawa  ani- 
25   gu'kwagwan,"  ugri'nan. 

Misax  kaga't  klmadcanit  minawa.  Kuniginm,  aniwa'k 
kabaya'i'  inantiwan ;  cigwa  tagwicinon  minawa. 

Mldac  ka'i'nat:  "'Au,  amba,  agwa'tayu'k,"  ugri-nai:  anotc 
awaslyac.  Mldac  kaga't.  Misa  cigwa  krpimadci'a't  lifii/u 


153 

"Just  as  I  came  in  sight  of  the  tree-tops,  then  was 
when  I  lost  my  wits." 

"Pray,  you,   O   Beaver!   go  fetch  some  earth." 

Truly  then  down  into  the  water  dived  the  Beaver. 
Presently  he  was  another  to  come  up  out  of  the  water 
dead.  When  (Nanabushu)  breathed  upon  him,  "Well?"  he 
said  to  him.  "Did  you  not  approach  anywhere  at  all  to  it?" 

"Truly,  as  far  as  halfway  down  the  trees  I  was,  where 
upon  I  lost  my  senses." 

"Too  bad,"  he  said  to  him. 

"Now,  you,   Muskrat." 

Whereupon  truly  into  the  water  dived  the  Muskrat. 
Presently  he  came  up  out  of  the  water  dead.  As  (Nana 
bushu)  took  him  up,  he  was  holding  (the  earth)  in  his 
clinched  paws,  in  both  paws  he  was  holding  the  earth ; 
also  in  his  feet,  in  each  foot  was  some  earth. 

"So  therefore  shall  we  now  be  able  to  create  the  earth," 
he  said  to  them.  So  it  was  then  that  he  breathed  upon 
the  earth,  and  by  degrees  it  grew  in  size,  larger  he  made 
it.  Now,  such  was  what  he  did.  When  he  knew  that  it 
was  grown  larger,  then  this  he  said:  "Pray,  Wolf,  do  you 
see  how  big  this  earth  is,"  he  said  to  the  Wolf  that  he 
had  employed. 

Thereupon  truly  away  went  (the  Wolf),  and  then  after 
wards  back  home  he  came. 

"(This,)  indeed,  shall  not  be  the  size  of  the  earth,"  he 
thought.  "Too  small  it  will  be."  And  so  what  he  did 
next  was  to  have  it  larger,  whereat  again  he  spoke  to 
(the  Wolf):  "Pray,  do  you  see  again  how  big  it  is,"  he 
said  to  him. 

Thereupon  truly  off  (the  Wolf)  started  again.  Lo,  some 
what  longer  was  he  absent ;  then  back  was  he  come  again. 

Whereupon  (Nanabushu)  said  to  them  :  "Now,  come,  go 
you  ashore,"  he  said  to  all  the  various  game-folk.  And  so 


154 

awasiya8.  Cigwa  kltagwicinon  ka'a'tionat.  "Aye8,  osam 
ta/a'gasa,"  ugrrnan.  "Anawi  klnlcugtinantiyan,  kawin  katii- 
bisasinon  ka/i'dnit  pitcmag  wa'pimatisit,"  ugrrnan.  Mlsa 
minawa  ka'i'ji'o'citot,  "Cigwa  taga,"  ugrrnan;  "mima  tac 
5  i'i'u  tanigu'kwagwan,"  ugri'nan. 


Misa7  minawa  ka'i'cimadcanit.  Misa  babra't  pmic  nro'- 
gun.  Kanro'gunagatnig,  cigwa  tagwicinon.  "Kagiitsa 
pPtca  ka'i-cayan." 

"Kawin,"     ugrrnan  :      "usam     atcina    kidinant.       Kawin 
10  tataTnigu'kwasinon,"    ugri'nan.      Mlsax    minawa  ka/rjiTrci- 
'tot ;    kanru'gunagatinink,    "Tagackuma,  inabin   anigu'kwa- 
gwan  minawa,"  udinan. 

Medac  kaga't  kimadcanit.    Caylgwa  minawa  klmadcawan 

mlsa7    pabra't    minawa.      AT,    plnic    kabaya'r    anantinint. 

15   Cigwa  tagwicin.    "Kagatsa  pl'tca  Ii8i/u  ka'i'cayan,"  ugl'i'nan. 

• 

Medac,  "Aye8,  asam  atcina  kidinant,"  ugri'nan.  "Nawa- 
tcisa  kayabi  ka'U'ci'tomin  o-o*  a'ki."  Mldac  minawa  ka'i-- 
ciuji'tod,  nawatc  tcimistcanig  kri'cictcigat. 

Mldac    kaga^t    anro'gunagatnik   minawa  ka'i'cimadcanit. 
20  Mlsar    minawa    pabra't-   plnic  ninguklsis  anantinint.      "Ml- 
mawln    illi/u    a'pitantit,"    ugri'naniman.       Kawin    nangwana 
i/u    kaya'pitantisinik,    ninguklsis  ka'i-nantinint  cigwa  tagwi 
cinon.      "Kaga'tsa  a'pitci   pl'tca  ka'i'cayan,"  i'kitowan. 


"Aye8,  kawin   'isi/u  mini'k  kita'i'cinantawanimisinon  tci'i'- 
25   nantiyan,"  ugri'nan.    "Na'a'gatamina  tataci  kabimatisit  uma 


'55 

it  was  true.  So,  then,  now  he  had  saved  the  lives  of  the 
game-folk.  Now,  back  home  came  the  one  he  had  em 
ployed.  "Ay,  too  small  it  will  be,"  he  said  to  him. 
"Though  you  have  been  gone  two  days,  yet  it  will  not 
be  (big)  enough  to  contain  all  that  are  to  live  in  times 
to  come,"  he  said  to  him.  And  so  when  he  had  worked 
upon  it  again,  "Now,  once  more,"  he  said  to  him:  "per 
haps  it  is  now  big  enough,"  he  said  to  him. 

Thereupon  again  off  started  (the  Wolf).  And  then  he 
awaited  his  coming  for  the  space  of  four  days.  When 
the  four  days  were  ended,  then  (the  Wolf)  arrived.  "Truly 
far  have  I  been." 

"No,"  he  said  to  him  :  "too  short  a  time  have  you  been 
gone.  It  will  not  be  large  enough,"  he  said  to  him.  And 
then  he  created  some  more  of  it ;  when  four  days  were 
ended,  "Pray,  now,  do  you  see  again  how  large  it  is,"  he 
said  to  him. 

Thereupon  truly  off  started  (the  Wolf).  When  again 
(the  Wolf)  had  gone,  then  (Nanabushu)  waited  for  his  coming 
again.  Oh,  for  a  long  while  was  he  gone.  Then  he  came 
back.  "Truly  far  have  I  been,"  he  said  to  (Nanabushu). 

Thereupon,  "Ay,  too  short  a  while  have  you  been 
gone,"  he  said  to  him.  "Larger  yet  will  we  make  this 
earth."  Thereupon  again  he  worked  upon  it,  to  the  end 
that  it  might  be  larger  he  did  his  work. 

Thereupon  truly,  after  four  days  were  ended,  then  again 
away  started  (the  Wolf).  And  so  again  (Nanabushu)  waited 
for  his  coming;  for  a  moon  was  (the  Wolf)  away.  "Per 
haps  now  he  is  gone  forever,"  was  his  thought  of  him. 
But  it  was  not  time  for  him  yet  to  be  gone  forever ;  so 
when  he  had  been  gone  for  a  moon,  then  back  he  came. 
"Truly  very  far  have  I  been,"  said  (the  Wolf). 

"Ay,  but  not  for  so  short  a  time  do  I  wish  you  to 
be  absent,"  Nanabushu  said  to  him.  "Not  so  very  few 


'56 

a'king,"  agri-nan.  "Pitclnag  taba'taTno  kapimadisit  oma11 
a'klng,"  ugrrnan.  Minawa  ka/iji'irci'towat,  nawatc  tcimi- 
stcanig  kijictcigawat. 


Midac  mmawa  ka'i'cimadcanit. 

5        Mlsa'   pabra/t  minawa,   plnic  ninguki^kinunawin  kl'i'nan- 
tiwan.      Cigwa  ningupibon  ka'i*nantinit  cigwa  tagwicinon. 

"Mlsa  iu  kaga  cigwa  ka/rnigu'kwag.  Kawln  po^c  lifii/u 
ta'i'nigu'kwasinon.  Mlnawasa  nawatc  ninga'U'ci'ton."  Mlsax 
minawa  ka'i'ci'O'ci'tot,  "Amc  minawa  inabin,"  ugri'nan. 

10        Cigwa  minawa  klmadcawan. 

Mlsa'  minawa  pabra't.  Cigwa  minawa  ningu'ki'kinona- 
win  kri'nantiwan,  midac  cigwa  plnic  nicuki'kinonawin 
anantinit.  Mlsa  papra't  awaniban  katagwicininit.  Midac 
ka'i'nandank :  "Awaniban,"  kri'nandam.  Mlsa'  anubabra/t, 

15   misa7  aci'a-'pitantinit.      Ka/rcrr'kitut :    "Taga,   kin,   kagagi, 
klwitasan   amantc  inigu^kwagwan,"   ugri'nan. 


Midac    kaga/t    cigwa  kipasigwa'u-t.      Mlsax   lpana  kama- 
dclsanit     awaniban    anubapra't ;    wrka    anunantawabamat, 
ninguki'kinonawin      ka*i*nahtinit.        Cigwa      pagamisawan. 
20   "Aniwa'kigu,   Nanabucu,  mistca  wo'o-   a'ki,"   ugri-gon. 


7  kaga  rru  ta'i'nigu'kwag,  manu  nawatc  minawa 
tcimistcag  ninga'i'cictciga,"  ugri'nan.  Midac  kaga't  mlnama 
ka'iji'irci'tot  i'i*u  a'ki.  Kanrtrgunatinik  cigwa  minawa 
uganonan  Ini/u  kagagi  wan. 


157 

will  the  number  be  of  them  who  shall  live  here  on  earth," 
he    said    to    him.      "In   time   many  will  they  be  who  shall 
live    here    on    earth,"    he    said    to    him.      When    they  had 
created    more    of   it,    it    was    to  the  end  that  it  might  be 
larger  that  they  worked. 

Thereupon  again  away  went  (the  Wolf). 

And  then  (Nanabushu)  waited  for  his  coming  again,  as 
long  as  a  full  cycle  of  seasons  was  (the  Wolf)  gone.  When 
for  a  winter  he  had  been  gone,  then  back  he  came. 

"Therefore  it  is  now  almost  as  large  as  it  will  be. 
It  is  not  yet  so  large  as  it  should  be.  Again  will  I  make 
it  larger."  And  when  he  had  made  some  more  of  it,  "Now 
again  do  you  look,"  he  said  to  him. 

Then  again  off  started  (the  Wolf). 

And  so  when  (Nanabushu)  waited  again  for  his  coming, 
then  for  another  cycle  of  seasons  was  (the  W7olf)  absent, 
and  then  it  came  to  pass  that  for  two  full  rounds  of  sea 
sons  was  (the  Wolf)  gone.  And  then  he  waited  for  him, 
but  he  was  not  destined  to  come  back.  And  this  was 
what  he  thought:  "He  is  gone,"  he  thought.  And  so  in 
vain  he  waited  for  him  ;  but  (the  Wolf)  was  gone  forever, 
at  which  he  said:  "Pray,  you,  O  Raven!  do  you  fly  round 
over  (this  earth)  to  find  out  how  large  it  is,"  he  said  to  him. 

Thereupon  truly  then  up  (the  Raven)  rose  on  the  wing. 
And  so  gone  was  he  when  he  started  flying  away,  and  it 
was  needless  of  (Nanabushu)  to  wait  for  him  ;  for  a  long- 
while  he  vainly  watched  for  him,  for  one  full  round  of 
seasons  had  he  been  gone  when  he  came  flying  back  home. 
"Rather  large,  O  Nanabushu!  is  this  earth,"  he  was  told. 

"It  is  now  almost  big  enough,  but  to  the  end  that  it 
yet  may  be  larger  will  I  make  it,"  he  said  to  him.  There 
upon  truly  more  of  the  earth  did  he  make.  After  four 
days  were  ended,  he  then  again  spoke  to  the  Raven. 

1   Meaning  the   people. 


Midac  kaga/t  minawa  cigwa  acipasigwa'irt  lafia/u  kagagi. 
Misa  cigwa  minawa  ki'kiwitasat  H*u  a'ki. 

Mlsa'    mlnawa    papra/t    Nanabucu.       Pmic    nicuki'kino- 

nuwin    anantinit  •,    awanibani'ku    katagwicininit,   pinic  cigwa 

5   kabaya'i*  anantinit;  wrka  cigwa  tagwicinon  mlnawa.    Mldac 

ka'i-nat:  "'A,  manu  nawatc  kayabi  tamistca."    Mldac  kaga't 

minawa  ka'ijro'ci'tot  i'i>u  a'ki  nrirgun,   "Amc,  tagackuma, 

minawa    awinabin,"    ugrrnan    mi/u    kagagiwan.       Caylgwa 

minawa    pabra't,    mlsax    ka'i'ci'a-'pitantinit.       Anupabl'a't. 

10   "Misa  lifii/u  intawa  ka'i'nigu'kwag  o  a'ki,"  ugri'nafi.     Mldac, 

"Mimawln    tciwaba*a-ngiban,"    krr'kito.       "Intawa    tcigusi- 

gunk  ninga'a-ci'ton   wl'ka  tcibltcimi'kasunu'k."  ] 


SERIES  II.     Nos.  19-32. 
19.   NANABUSHU  AND  THE  CARIBOU. 2 

Nanabucusa    papimusa ;    ningutingigu    papimusat    slblns 

umatabl ;   a'pidcisa  mackusi'kani.      Inabit  adi'kwan  pimima- 

1 5   daplwan ;   nibiwa  ackana^  udayawani.3     Kwaya'kigu  pimia- 

iyawakusiwawan,      midac     i'i/>u     ajiplpagimat :      "Nicimica, 

a'kawa,   klwlwapamin  !" 


Kaga't  kibi'tcikapawiwan. 

Anlcinasi'kawat ;      payacwabamat     oganonan :      "Kaga't 


1  Unfortunately  the  ending  is  incomplete. 

2  See  series   i,  No.   14,   p.    117. 


159 

Whereupon  truly  again  up  flew  the  Raven.  And  then 
again  did  he  fly  roundabout  the  earth. 

Thereupon  again  for  him  did  Nanabushu  wait.  For  as 
long  as  two  cycles  of  the  seasons  was  (the  Raven)  gone  •, 
as  time  went  on,  there  was  no  sight  of  him  coming  back, 
continuing  so  till  he  had  been  gone  a  long  while ;  a  long 
time  afterwards  he  came  back  again.  And  this  was  what 

o 

he  said  to  him:  "Well,  let  it  be  still  larger."  Thereupon 
truly,  after  he  had  been  creating  it  for  four  days  more, 
"Well,  now,  this  time,  again  go  you  and  see,"  he  said  to 
the  Raven.  Again  he  waited  for  him,  but  this  time  he 
was  gone  forever.  In  vain  he  waited  for  him.  "That 

o 

then,  no  doubt,  will  be  the  extent  of  this  earth,"  he  said 
to  the  (animal-folk).  And  now,  "(I)  fear  that  this  will 
float  away,"  he  said.  "Therefore  in  order  that  it  may  be 
heavy  will  I  make  it  so  that  it  shall  never  be  moved." 1 

SERIES  II.     Nos.  19-32. 
19.   NANABUSHU  AND  THE  CARIBOU. 3 

Now,  Nanabushu  was  travelling  about ;  now,  once  while 
travelling  about,  he  came  out  upon  a  brook ;  an  exceedingly 
broad  meadow  was  there.  While  looking  around,  (he  saw) 
a  caribou  moving  out  upon  the  meadow ;  many  the  prongs 
he  had  on  his  antlers.3  And  straight  across  the  meadow 
was  he  moving,  whereupon  (Nanabushu)  called  to  him 
with  a  loud  voice:  "O  my  younger  brother!  wait,  I  want 
to  see  you !" 

Truly  he  stopped  (and)  stood. 

Then  (Nanabushu)  walked  over  to  where  he  was ;  when 
he  was  in  close  view  of  him,  he  addressed  him,  saying: 

3  Nibiwa  ackanaE  udayawani,  "many  the  prongs  he  had  on  his  antlers;"  literally, 
"many  the  horns  he  had." 


i6o 

matcina'kamigat  wandusayan,  odanang  nimprirndcl.  Awa- 
sinago  kinisitiwag  ininiwibanlg,  mlgu  *ru  tabita  klnisitiwat. 
Kaga't  sanagat.  Nlnanaginiwanaban,  midacigu  iu  pimini- 
cimoyan.  Ocrwisagu  totamobanlg."  Odota'pinani  Niina- 
5  bucowan  Ini/u  umi'tigwablni ;  acfkwa'tawanit ;  kaT'kwa'ta- 
wanit  ubi'kwa'kuni,  cigwasa  unamma'kwinu'tagdn.  Cigwa- 
dac  kigitowan :  "Misa  o  nasab  andodamowa'pan." 


Ta'tiwa,     acipimugut,    wantcitagu    waca'pit    u'tininagon. 
Anicna  plwabi'k  sagapi'kisini  rrma  ubi'kwa'kuning.      Anu- 
TO  kwaskuni  a'a'wisa  adi'k  wandcitagu  a'konamut ;   mlsagu  iu 
kinibut. 

Tava,    Nanabucu   oriio;a't  minwantam   wantcitagu  winino- 

J  O       C5  •  •  O 

wan  !ni/u  udadi'kuman.  Ac,  mlsagu  cigwa  madcrkawat 
wlninira't.  Alkawa,  udagwawanalk  udoci'ton ;  kaklci'tod 

15  mldac  ima  ani'a-gotod  4si/u  uwininon.  Paba'pic  kaklci'kawat 
a'pidcisa  pa'kada.  "Pamagu  wawani  gld'tayan  ningawlsin," 
inandam.  Wlyasi  dac  mlnawa  abi'ta  pimida  udclba'kwaclan. 
Cigwasa  ka'klcitanik,  "Misa  cigwa  tcimadantcigayan,"  inan 
dam.  Wigwas  unantawabandan  mldac  ima  acagwa'a'nk. 

20  Kayagwa'a'nk  Nanabucu  klgito :  "A'tawa,  ningakiwiyagan- 
tan.  A'pagicsa  i'kwatug  wito'pamag  a'pidcigu  tata'kwu- 
tclngwanat."  Ta,  cigwa  upa'kwacan  4ci/u  wlnin.  "Kaga'tsa 
ningawl'a'ngatan." 


Pamagu     pi'kwanang     rrma     tciga'kwawinini,      "Kantc, 
25   kantc,"  inwawan   mi'tigon. 

Misa7  upagitinan   Na*nabucu   waca'kamu'pan.      "Kaga'tsa 
ningikagwanisaglnawamigun."      Wawlp   acipa'kwacank   'isi/u 


"Truly  a  wicked  time  is  going  on  at  the  place  from 
whence  I  come,  from  a  town  is  where  I  come.  Day 
before  yesterday  were  the  men  killing  one  another,  act 
ually  on  both  sides  were  they  killing  one  another.  It  is 
truly  desperate.  I  tried  to  stop  the  fight,  and  then  I 
fled  away.  Thus  were  they  doing  at  the  time."  Nana- 
bushu  reached  for  his  bow ;  then  he  strung  it ;  after  he 
had  strung  it,  he  then  aimed  (to  shoot).  And  then  he 
spoke,  saying:  "This  was  what  they  did  at  the  time." 

Poor  creature  !  when  he  was  shot  by  (Nanabushu),  right 
in  the  side  behind  the  shoulder  was  he  shot.  According 
to  the  story,  a  metal  was  sticking  out  of  the  arrow.  In 
vain  did  the  caribou  try  to  leap  away,  even  till  he  could 
breathe  no  more ;  and  then  he  died. 

Oh,  now  truly  pleased  was  Nanabushu  that  so  unusually 
fat  his  caribou  should  be.  Ah !  and  then  was  when  he 
began  work  upon  it,  cutting  up  its  meat.  First,  he  made 
a  roasting-rack ;  when  he  had  finished  it,  he  thereupon 
hung  up  his  fat.  By  the  time  he  had  finished  his  work 
on  (the  caribou),  very  hungry  was  he.  "Not  till  I  have 
put  (things)  in  good  order  will  I  eat,"  he  thought.  So 
some  meat  partly  fat  he  cooked.  And  when  it  was  done 
cooking,  "It  is  now  time  that  I  eat,"  he  thought.  For 
(some)  birch-bark  he  sought,  upon  which  he  spread  out 
(what  he  had  cooked).  After  Nanabushu  had  dipped  it 
out  of  (the  kettle),  he  said  :  "  Ah !  but  I  shall  spoil  it  by 
eating  it  (alone).  Would  that  I  might  eat  with  a  woman 
who  was  short  from  groin  to  knee!"  However,  presently 
he  sliced  off  a  piece  of  the  fat.  "Verily,  I  shall  spoil  it 
by  eating  it  (alone)." 

Then  of  a  sudden  at  his  back  from  yonder  edge  of  the 
woods,  "Kantc,  kantc,"  came  the  sound  of  a  tree. 

Thereupon  down  Nanabushu  laid  what  he  was  going 
to  put  into  his  mouth.  "Truly  am  I  terribly  angered  by 

I  I — PUBL.    AMER.    ETHN.    SOC.    VOL.    VII. 


162 

wamidci'pan  umawinanan  ini/u  mi'tigon.    Aji*a'4kwandawat ; 

mlclac  Ii8i/u  kakackrtrt,  midac  ima  ajida'tot  4YU  wamldci'pan. 
Mlsa  lifii/u  ajita'kwamigut  Ini/u  mi'tigon ;  paya'ta'ircigo 
pldanimatini.  Amc  mlsa  Ii8i/u  ayagosit.  Anlc  anawi  ucla- 
5  nuwf kwutci'ton  kawln  ugacki'tosln  Ii8i/u  unintc.  Ningutin- 
gigu  ayagosit  inabit  ka^pi'irndusat,  owabaman  ma'I'nganan 
plmatapiskusiwanit ;  mlnawa  pacik,  kayabi  pajik  kwaya'kigu 
pimi'a'yawackusiwawas.  Kwatcigu  pami'ku'pinit  ajiplpagi- 
mat:  "Nisttclnistca !"  udinae. 


10  Kibiltcikapawiwafi.  Anlc  'a'a/widac  a'kiwa^zImaTngan 
oganona  *i8i/u  unldcanisas  :  "Mlsa/  au  Nanabucu  kaganoni- 
nank.  Kao^o  ugini'tonatuef  i'i'nia  klbaskinawat.  Ka^odac 

•  o  o  o  ^  • 

iciwabisitug     'i^ma     kra'gosit.        'A  'a11,     madcada',     ijata7 
klbaskinawat.  " 


15        Nanabucu  kanawabamat   pimadclba'i'tinit. 

Anln  ka'i'cinamowat  ma^rnganag  panagu   adi'kwan  nan 
awicicrasunit.      Anlc    ka/rnabamawat,1    mlsao'u   ciVwa   mata 

o  •  •  £>  <>  • 

mawat.      Kawln  kanaga  nomag  kitacitasiwag  'iY11  ki'kitam 
wawat.      A'pidcigu  wawip  cigwa  animadcawag. 


20        Nanabucu    uganona2 :     "  Nistcimistca,    kagux    ta'taganapi-' 
'kagun  !" 

Ma'rnoranao;    acita'tagranabiwat,   a'tiwa,   anln  acinamowat 

o  •      •  o  •  & 

panagu     wmin     agotani.       Wantcitagu     kamama'kantiwad 
mldciwad.      Kawln  kanaga  nomag  kltaci'taslwag  krkitamo- 

1   Anic    kii'I'nabamawiit,    "they  had  nothing  to  gain   by  simply   looking  upon   it" 
(literally,   "why   should  they  look  upon  it,"   but  the  sense  is  in  the  other  rendering). 


1 63 

that."  When  he  had  quickly  sliced  off  (a  piece  of)  what 
he  was  going  to  eat,  he  rushed  to  the  tree.  Then  up  he 
climbed ;  and  when  he  got  up,  he  then  placed  there  what 
he  was  going  to  eat.  Thereupon  he  was  caught  fast  by 
the  tree ;  for  just  at  the  moment  (a  gust  of)  wind  came. 
And  so  now  up  there  he  hung.  To  be  sure,  he  tried  in 
vain  to  get  his  finger  out,  but  he  could  not  succeed. 
Then  by  and  by,  while  hanging  up  there  and  looking 
towards  the  place  from  whence  he  had  come  afoot,  he 
saw  a  Wolf  coming  out  into  the  meadow ;  (he  saw)  another, 
still  another,  coming  out  into  the  meadow.  Just  as  they 
were  about  entering  the  cover  of  the  woods,  then  he  called 
aloud  to  them:  "My  younger  brothers!"  he  said  to  them. 

They  stopped  (and)  stood.  Now,  the  old  Wolf  addressed 
his  children,  saying:  "That  is  Nanabushu  who  is  speaking 
to  us.  Something  probably  he  has  killed  at  yonder  place 
where  his  smoke  is  lifting.  And  something  must  have 
happened  to  him,  that  he  should  be  hanging  there.  Well, 
let  us  go,  let  us  go  thither  where  he  has  a  smoke  going !" 

Nanabushu  then  watched  them  as  they  began  racing 
hitherward. 

What  should  the  Wolves  have  appear  but  a  vast  store 
of  caribou  already  prepared.  Now,  they  had  nothing  to 
gain  by  simply  looking  upon  it,1  so  thereupon  they  set 
to  work  eating  it.  Not  a  whit  were  they  a  long  (time) 
occupied  before  they  had  it  all  eaten  up.  And  very  soon 
were  they  started  on  their  way. 

Nanabushu  addressed  them,  saying:  "My  little  brothers, 
don't  you  look  up !" 

As  the  WTolves  looked  up,  why,  what  were  they  to 
behold  but  a  great  heap  of  fat  hanging  aloft.  What  they 
simply  did  was  to  grab  it  from  one  another  when  they  ate. 
Not  at  all  long  were  they  at  it  before  they  had  it  eaten  up. 
Then  off  they  started  racing  together ;  when  they  were 


i64 

wat.      Animadclba-rtiwa8 ;    kapickunagusinit,    nabawic   kibi- 
'tanimatini.      Kutciwrkwutcrir   ajikacki'to't  4si/u  anintc. 

Ajimsantawat,  a/tawa  Nanabucu  kaga/t  ko'padantam. 
Ajiki'tcimawit,  anlc  a'pidci  wlwlsini.  Indawa  4fiiwa  mis- 
5  kwlwa'kamiganik  mii/u  itinunk  mwacagantcigat.  A'pidcigu 
wasi'tawl.  "Ambagicsa7  kacki'toyan  'l^i'11  tciginabigonsi- 
wiyan."  Anigu'k  uwrkwatciton  'r8!^11  wi'kinabi'konsiwit. 
Kaga/t  ugacki'ton  crQ'\-11  kinabi'konsiwit,  mlsadac  iu  pitcinag 
minwlt  'i-8i/<u  wlsinit.  Aniwa'k  anitatawlsini.  Midac  iu 

10  ustigwan  aniwa'k  liei/u  pasiganagatinik  aniwa'k  udontcimi- 
lkan  ci'8i/<u  pimita.  Magwagu  'i^i^witi  wlsinit  pasiga- 
nagatinig,  a'tiwa,  acinonta'a'nicinabawit.  Wantagu  ima 
uka'tigwang  mri'ma  ajra/ta'o-sut.  A'ta,  Nanabucu  kawin 
wabandanzln  'is;i/u  kaijat.  Wagunamwinan  ki'tci'a'nigu'k 

15  ajimadcat.  Papimiba'tod  a'pidcisa  kusigwanini  lifii/u  usti 
gwan;  cigwasa  papimiba'tod  ajibita^ucing,  "Tcwan,  tcwiin," 
ka-rnwawakami'kicing.  Nanabucu  ajiklgitut :  "Kidawana- 
na'tigu  ?"  Cigwa  uganonigon :  "  Nlnisa'ku  uca'kamigank 
kananlbiwi'a'n," 


20        "Ou,  kiwlgwasi11." 

"Kaga't,   Nanabucu,   nlwigwasi11." 

Mlnawa  madca  anigu'k.  Ningutingigu  pi'ta'kucin  minawa 
Nanabucu,  misa  kayabi  aniwawa'kamikicing.  Nanabucu 
ajiklgitut :  "  Kituwanana'tigu  ?" 

25        "Ayes,   nini'ku  anipatinank  kananlbawiyan." 

"Ou,  klcingwalkuu  ingwana."  Mlsax,  ajimadciba'tot  intiku 
aniba'kamiga,  inantam  Nanabucu.  Ningutingigu  mlnawa 
ajipita'kucink.  "Awanan  kin  ayawiyan  ?"  2  ilkito. 

1   The  head  of  the  caribou. 


out  of  sight,  unfortunately  not  till  then  did  the  wind  go 
down.  He  tried  getting  his  fingers  loose  till  he  succeeded. 
When  down  he  climbed,  poor  Nanabushu  truly  felt  dis 
appointed.  Then  he  had  a  great  cry,  for  he  was  very 
anxious  to  eat.  Now,  there  was  blood  on  the  ground,  and 
such  was  the  place  where  he  ate.  Very  awkward  was  it 
(for  him  to  get  to  it).  "Would,  indeed,  that  I  might  be 
come  a  little  serpent!"  With  all  his  power  he  tried  to 
become  a  little  snake.  Truly  successful  was  he  in  changing 
to  a  little  snake,  and  then  he  was  in  an  easy  position  to 
eat.  Pretty  well  contented  was  he  as  he  continued  eating. 
And  now  the  head  :  had  in  it  somewhat  of  a  groove,  where 
he  discovered  some  fat.  And  while  he  was  eatino-  there 

o 

in    the    groove,    why,    he    turned  into  a  person  before  he 
expected.      Exactly    over    his   forehead  was  where  he  was 
held    fast.      Why,    Nanabushu    did    not    see    where  to  go. 
It  so  happened  that  with  great  speed  he  started.      As  he 
ran  along,  exceedingly  heavy  was  the  head ;  when  running 
along,    he    bumped    against   a  tree.      "Tcwa11,  tcwan,"  was 
the  sound  he  made  when  he  fell.      Nanabushu  then  said  : 
"And    what    kind    of    a    tree    are    you?"      Then    was    he 
answered:    "Always  on  the  ridge  do   I   stand." 
"Oh,   then  you   are  a  birch!" 
"To  be  sure,   Nanabushu,   I   am   a  birch." 
He  continued  speeding  on.     And  one  other  time  against 
a  tree  Nanabushu  bumped,  whereupon  he  made  the  same 
noise    as    he    fell.      Nanabushu    then  said:    "What  kind  of 
a  tree  are  you?" 

"Yea,   ever  on   the  hillside  do  I  stand." 
"Oh,    then    you    are  indeed  a  pine!"      And  then   as  he 
started,  it  seemed  that  he  was  running  down  hill,  so  thought 
Nanabushu.      And  another  time  he  bumped  against  a  tree 
(and)  fell.      "Who  are  you?"2  he  said. 

2  Awanan  kin  ayawiyan?  literally,   "who  are  you  that  you  are.1' 


1 66 

"Nlnsa'ku  a'kwa'kamiga'k  kananlbawiyan." 
"O,  kiglci'kiy 
"  Nanabucu,   kaga't  ningici'ki11." 

Anigu'k    ajimadcat   Nanabucu.      Nicingigu  ka'pangicing, 
5   panagu  kasaswanik  Ini/u  u'tawagan.      Mlsa  cigwa  madciya- 
tagat.      Kawm  ugi'kand^zm  a'pl'tcanig  'i-8!7-11  saga'i'gan. 

Ml    nano^wana    iu    anicinaba8    andaci    odanawi'tonit    'i{li/u 

•      o        •  • 

saga'i'gan  iwitac  pamatagat.  Nintigumi  kaga't  adi'k  pa- 
madagat  acinagusit  Nanabucu.  Pamagu  mlnangwana  iu 
10  ima  u'pimacicutaux  wandcipa'kublt  waca/u  Nanabucu.  "Ale, 
'a'e1,  micawa  pamatagat !  l  A'a/u,  mawinatawata  !"  Panagu 
kamadwata'ta'o'nagwanig. 


A'ta,  Nanabucu  anigu'k  ajimadcat. 

"A,"  piglgitowag,    "a'a'e1,   kawasa,  kimicaganigunan  !" 

15  "Mlnagwana  pacu  ninga'i'cimicaga,"  inandam.  Mldac 
kaga't  anigu'k  Nanabucu  ajimadcat.  Ningutingigu  ajita- 
ba'kickikat. 

A'pidcisa     upacwabamawan    Igix    anicinaban    kanawaba- 
mawat,    kuniginln,   Nanabucowan  ani'u'ndci'a'gwagwackuni- 

20  wan.  Anic  aniba'a'bi'kani ;  kumagu  a'pl  tagwucininit, 
a'tiwa,  acocacapi'kicininit  Nanabucowan.  Acibasisitonit 
'i^^wa  udoctigwanimini.  Ka'O'nickabi'tonit  anigagawa'pi- 
wan.  Mldac  Ii8i/u  aniglgitonit :  "Kaga'tigu  micawa  pama 
tagat  inantamog  Igi/u  anicinabag." 


25        Kavvln    kanaga    tibatcimoslwan    Nanabucowan    anuwika- 
gwatcimawat. 


1 67 

"Always  by  the  edge  of  the  bank  do  I  stand." 

"Oh,  then  you  are  a  cedar!" 

"Nanabushu,   truly  am  I  a  cedar." 

With  all  his  speed  then  started  Nanabushu.  And  when 
he  was  come  at  the  end  of  the  second  leap,  then  was 
there  a  steady  ringing  in  his  ears.  Thereupon  he  then 
began  swimming.  He  did  not  know  how  big  was  the  lake. 

There  happened  to  be  some  people  dwelling  in  a  town 
by  the  lake  where  he  was  swimming.  Very  much  like  a 
caribou  swimming  past  was  the  look  of  Nanabushu.  Then 
of  a  sudden  there  was  stirring  at  yonder  place,  off  a  way 
from  where  Nanabushu  had  gone  down  into  the  water. 
"  Halloo,  an  elk  is  swimming  past !  Come,  let  us  chase 
him  in  our  canoes!"  And  forthwith  there  arose  a  hubbub 
(with  paddles  and  canoes  when  shoving  off  into  the  water). 

Oh,  how  Nanabushu  went  with  all  his  speed ! 

"Ah,"  they  said  as  they  came,  "too  bad,  impossible, 
we  shall  be  beaten  to  the  shore!" 

"It  must  be  that  nigh  to  the  shore  am  I  getting,"  he 
thought.  Thereupon  truly  with  full  speed  then  Nanabushu 
started.  Then  all  at  once  he  touched  the  bottom. 

Exceedingly  nigh  were  the  people  observing  (the  elk), 
when,  lo,  Nanabushu  went  leaping  out  of  the  water.  Now, 
there  was  a  bank  of  loose  stones  sloping  down  to  the 
water ;  and  when  he  was  come  a  certain  distance,  why, 
upon  a  rock  Nanabushu  slipped  (and)  fell.  Then  he  burst 
open  that  (caribou)  head  of  his.  When  up  he  sprang 
from  where  he  fell,  away  he  went  falling  headlong  with 
laughter.  And  this  he  said  as  he  went  along:  "So  truly 
an  elk  was  swimming  past,  thought  the  people." 

Nothing  at  all  did  Nanabushu  tell  when  in  vain  they 
tried  to  question  him. 


i68 


20.   NANABUSHU  BREAKS  THE  NECKS  OF  THE  DANCING  GEESK. 

Mlsagu  li<8i/<u  ba'pic  animadcanit.  Nanabucu  anibabi- 
musat  cigwadac  umadabl  slblns ;  udanibabima'a'ton  kaga- 
'pri'gu  mis;tcanig  li'8i'-u  slbi.  Cigwadac  udababatan  4'8i/>u 
saga'i'gan,  a'pidci  unicicinini  ima  wandcisagitawanig  'i{":i/u 
5  slbi.  Inabit  Nanabuco  mlnisi'u'tawanganig ;  owabamas 
ni4kansa8,  a'pidcisa  pa^tinlnowa8.  Nanabucu  wagunaniwi- 
nan,  natagamaba'to,  udawru'da'pinan  ini/u  clngubln  ;  ulku- 
nacicing  ugacklwaginan.  Uciwani'ka  iu  cingubl,  a'pidcisa 
ubwawanana8  iu  cingubl.  Miclac  Ii8i'u  anlcimadcat  udani'a'- 
10  sunan  'i'Y111  umi'kwaban.  Anisagawat  kigito  au  kis'tcinrka : 
"Nanabucu  sagawat.  Ucimuyu^k,  kagugu  kiga'i'gunan." 


Kawlndac  win  pasigu'irsiwag  lgi/u  ni'kansag.  Kuniginin, 
oganonigowan  Nanabucowan  :  "Kaga/tsagu  nintinigawagan- 
tam  anuwabamagwanin  !gi/u  niclmayag.  Kaga'tiginin  pa 

15  'pina'kainigat  wandusayan ;  mlsa7  iwiti7  nlmi'i'tiwat  anicina- 
bag.  Kagwanisagimaminwa'i-gataniwan  !ni/u  nagamunan 
nagamuwatcin.  Mlsagu  na  onou  pamondamanin  Ini/u  naga 
munan.  Ambasano  kammi'i'ninim.  Mro*ma  tcibagiton- 
daman  Ini/u  nagamunan.  Ninga'u'ci'ton  'i^ma  katacitayan 

20  tcinlmi'i-nagu'k.  Ta'irnicicin  nlmi'i'tlwigamik  ka'irci'toyan." 
Nanabucu  mlsa  cigwa  madci'tad  uci'tod,  cingubl  waka- 
lkinat ;  tcitagu  pacitcipagisusinik  mi/'itu  aplta'tod 


169 


2O.   NANAHUSIIU  BREAKS  THE  NECKS  OF  THE  DANCING  GEESE. l 

And  so  in  course  of  time  he  was  upon  his  way.  While 
Nanabushu  was  travelling  about,  he  soon  came  out  upon 
a  brook ;  he  followed  its  course  till  at  last  it  (opened  out 
into)  a  large  river.  Then  presently  he  came  in  sight  of 
a  lake,  very  beautiful  was  the  place  where  the  river  flowed 
out  (into  the  lake).  While  Nanabushu  was  looking  about, 
(he  saw)  an  island  of  sand  ;  he  saw  some  Goslings,  very 
numerous  were  they.  Nanabushu,  simpleton  that  he  was, 
went  running  out  towards  the  land,  he  went  to  get  some 
balsam-boughs;  in  his  old  soiled  blanket  he  wrapped  them. 
He  made  a  pack  of  the  balsams,  a  very  heavy  pack  did 
the  balsams  make.  And  so  when  he  started  on  his  way, 
he  had  his  hands  on  the  tump-line  (running  from  the  fore 
head  back  over  the  shoulders).  When  he  came  into  view 
(round  a  point  of  land),  up  spoke  a  big  Goose:  "Nana 
bushu  is  coming  into  view  (round  the  point).  Do  you 
flee,  for  something  shall  we  be  told." 

But  the  Goslings  did  not  fly  away.  Lo,  they  were 
addressed  by  Nanabushu  saying:  "Truly  am  I  sad  at 
heart  whenever  I  fail  to  see  my  little  brothers.  Now,  truly 
a  merry  time  is  going  at  the  place  from  whence  I  come ; 
for  at  that  place  are  the  people  dancing  together.  Wonder 
fully  good  are  the  songs  that  they  sing.  Pray,  let  me  make 
you  dance.  Now,  these  that  I  have  on  my  back  are  those 
very  songs.  And  down  at  this  spot  will  I  lay  the  songs. 
I  will  fix  a  place  yonder  where  I  will  devote  (myself)  to 
making  you  dance.  Handsome  will  be  the  dance-lodge  that 
I  will  make."  Nanabushu  thereupon  set  to  work  making 
it,  with  balsams  he  made  a  stockade ;  at  only  such  a  height 
that  it  could  not  be  taken  at  a  leap  was  how  high  he 

1  For  other  versions  see  Nos.    1 1   and  48. 


unlmri'tlwigamig.      "Ml'-r11    cigwa   tcimadci'taiyang  tcinlmi- 
•i'tiyank.      Ambasa,   mi''i'u  icra'gwa'taiyu'k." 

Kaga/t  ni'kansag  agwa'tawag. 

"Ambasano,    kawlndamoninim    ka/a'rciyag.      Migtl   rci/>u 
5   kani'rna/a'man   aTdyu'k   ^{•2{/-u  tcinlmiyag.      Ayangwamisi- 
yu'k.      Kagi/  wlwamwisi'kagun.      Mlsagu  iu  cigwa  tciplndi- 
gayak  ^Ym^  nlmi'i'tlwigamigunk." 

Ajipmdigawat  ni'kansag,   kaya  win  mang ;  kaya  win  dac 
cingibis  ajiplndigat. 

10  Ka'kina  ka'plndiganit  Nanabucu  uglpa'a-n  udickwandam. 
Cigwax  Nanabucu  wlmadcra'm  a'kawa  minawa  uganona^: 
"Migu  iu  kania'rna'a'man,  aTdyu'k.  A'pidac  pasinawan- 
disuyan  mra^pi  kapasigwlyan.  Ml  wlnigu  iu  nanasawaya'I* 
kababatacicimoyan.  Mlsa  cigwa  tcimadcra'man  :" 


15  "Pasangwabicimowinan  ninpidonan,  nicimisitug  ! 

Nabanagatacimowimm,  nicimisitug,  ninpitonan." 

Midac    cigwa    a'pidci   udcl'kima8,   misagu  kaga't  ka'kina 
pasangwabicimunit. 

"Ayansigwacimowinaii  nimpidonan,  nicimisitug." 
20        Kaga/t  ayansigwa'tawa11  pa'kic  nlminit. 

Nanabucu    ajikigitut :    "A1    exi,   mlcigwa  pasinawanintisu- 

yan !"      Ajipasigwlt    Nanabucu    papanimi,    Nanabucu    uda- 

ninatcicimuttawai;.         Wagunaniwinan      pimi'a'yasigwa'tanit 

^.sj'.u  ni'kansa8.    Aji'U'dota'pinat  ajipo'kugwabinat ;  minawa 

25   abiding  pimra-yasigwa'tanit  ajipo'kugwabinat. 


Ckwantank    iwiti    tacicimu    'a^V11    mang.      Intigunantagu 
umadwagwawabina,  iu  ni'tam  mang.    Wagunaniwinan  pangi 


made  his  dance-lodge.  "It  is  now  time  for  us  to  begin 
dancing  together.  Hither,  now  come  you  out  of  the  water." 

To  be  sure,   the   Goslings  came   out  of  the  water. 

"Harken!  I  will  tell  you  how  you  are  to  act.  According 
as  I  sing,  so  do  you  when  you  dance.  Do  you  take  pains. 
Don't  you  fail  in  anything.  Now  is  the  time  for  you  to 
enter  into  the  dance-lodge." 

Then  in  went  the  Goslings,  likewise  the  Loon ;  and  also 
the  Diver  entered  in. 

When  all  had  gone  inside,  Nanabushu  closed  up  the 
doorway.  Now,  Nanabushu  was  about  to  sing,  but  first 
he  addressed  them  again,  saying:  "Therefore  according 
to  what  I  say  in  my  song,  that  you  do.  And  when  I 
become  thrilled,  then  shall  I  rise  to  my  feet.  Thereupon 
in  amongst  you  shall  I  dance.  It  is  time  for  me  now  to 
begin  singing :" 

"A  dance  with  the  eyes  closed  do  I  fetch ! 

A  dance  upon  one  leg,  O  my  little  brothers !  do  I  fetch." 

Thereupon  then  were  they  much  thrilled  with  the  song, 
and  so  all  of  course  danced  with  their  eyes  closed. 

"A  dance  with  the  necks  close  up  together  do  I  fetch,  O  my  little  brothers !" 

Of  course,  up  close  together  came  their  necks,  while  at 
the  same  time  they  were  dancing. 

Nanabushu  then  spoke  up:  "Behold,  now  am  I  in  a 
transport  of  delight!"  Rising  to  his  feet,  Nanabushu  moved 
about,  dancing  here  and  there,  approaching  (the  Goslings) 
while  he  danced.  Foolishly  did  the  Goslings  hold  their 
necks  close  up  together.  As  he  took  them  up,  he  broke 
their  necks ;  once  again  when  they  bunched  with  necks 
together,  he  broke  their  necks. 

By  the  doorway  yonder  the  Loon  was  dancing.  Now, 
it  seemed  as  if  he  heard  the  sound  of  the  breaking  of 
necks,  thus  it  seemed  to  the  Loon.  Happening  to  open 


172 

ajitockabit  a'tawa,  inabit  mang,  na'i'tag  ubimibolkugwanani 
Nanabucowan  ni'kansa8.  Ajiklgitut  mang:  "A'e^e1,  Nana- 
bucu  kidickwanigunan  !"  Misa'  a'kawa  a'kitut  mang,  migu 
iu  anawitabacitcipagisut. 


5  Altaa,  Nanabucu  miwanigu  iniwati  mangwan  nwa'pi- 
nanat.  lTa,  mang  anupapisingwa'i'gat.  Anawidac  pacu- 
nagwatini  i'i'wa  nibi  abanabit  aca  pacu  Nanabucowan  • 
ajipa'kublgwackunit  mang.  A'tawa,  ajitangiskagut  'i^ma 
uclganang.  Kaya  win  a'i'tag  anupa'kublba'i'wa  'a8a/u 
10  cingibis,  ml  gaya  wlni  i/u  kltangickagut  Ini/u  Nanabucowan. 
Mlsa  iu  cigwa  ajiklgitut  Nanabucu:  "Mlsa  iu  mini'k  ka'a'- 
'klwang  ka*i'cinagusit  laGau  mang,  kaya  'a^a'11  cingibis." 


Misa  cigwa  ajigu'pit  iwiti  unimi'i'tiwigamigunk,  aniwa- 
lkigu  mbiwa  uglnisa  cisi/u  nikansa8.  Nanabucu  ajiklgitut : 

15  "Arnantcigic  a'pidci  ka'i'ciminosa'kwayan  ogo/u  nini'kansi- 
mag?  Ambasano,  ninganigwa'a'bwanag."  Kaga't  madci'ta 
Nanabucu  ki'tcibotawat  mi'tawangank.  A'pidcisa  mbiwa 
ka/rcawangitanik,  mlsa  cigwa  madci'tad  ningwa'a'bwat. 
Mldac  'i^i7*11  klwitackuta  anisagisitacima8  48i/u  uni'kansima8. 

20  Ka^Icltad  mldac  i'i>u  kaga/t  wlniba.  "Ambasano,  klgana- 
wanta'i'n  imwa  nini'kansimao-,"  udinan  lni/u  utcltln.  "Nintclt, 

O  •  O  ' 

kanawanim  gwatcinatawm  awlya  ningakimotimik  iwa  nini- 
'kansima8."  Nanabucu  ajitcangitiyakisut ;  mldac  iwiti 
nayaciwaninik  ajitcangitiya'kidut.  Mlnawa  uganonan  Ini/u 
25  utcltln:  " Wlndamawicin  anicinabag  sagawa'O'wat."  Uga- 
nonigon  utcltln  :  "Klgawlndamon." 


his  eyes  a  little,  why,  when  the  Loon  looked,  it  was  to 
see  Nanabushu  at  just  the  time  when  he  was  among  the 
Goslings  breaking  their  necks.  Then  up  spoke  the  Loon  : 
"Look  out!  by  Nanabushu  are  we  being  killed  off."  Now, 
when  the  Loon  first  spoke,  he  then  cleared  (the  balsam 
enclosure),  just  barely  getting  over. 

Oh,  but  how  Nanabushu  did  go  in  pursuit  of  yonder 
Loon !  Ah,  and  how  the  Loon  did  struggle  in  vain  to  get 
away !  And  though  near  by  seemed  yonder  water,  yet 
when  he  looked  back,  here  close  was  Nanabushu ;  then 
into  the  water  leaped  the  Loon.  Poor  thing !  he  was  kicked 
on  the  small  of  his  back.  And  in  time  did  the  Diver  also 
try  to  escape  into  the  water,  but  to  no  purpose,  for  he 
too  was  kicked  by  Nanabushu.  Thereupon  then  up  spoke 
Nanabushu:  "Therefore  as  long  as  the  world  lasts,  thus 
will  look  the  loon,  so  too  the  diver." 

So  then  up  from  the  shore  he  went  to  his  dance-lodge 
yonder,  and  rather  a  good  many  Goslings  he  had  killed. 
Nanabushu  then  said:  "Wonder  in  what  especially  fine  way 
I  may  cook  these  Goslings  of  mine !  I  say,  I  am  going  to 
bake  them."  Truly  to  work  set  Nanabushu  building  a 
great  fire  upon  the  sandy  beach.  When  a  very  great  deal 
of  the  sand  was  hot,  accordingly  then  did  he  begin  baking 
them.  And  so  in  a  circle  about  the  fireplace  he  laid  his 
Goslings,  (covering  them)  so  that  only  their  feet  could  be 
seen  sticking  out.  When  he  had  finished  (this  work),  he 
was  of  course  anxious  to  sleep.  "I  say,  I  would  have  you 
keep  watch  of  these  Goslings  of  mine,"  he  said  to  his  bottom. 
"My  bottom,  do  you  keep  watch  over  them,  lest  someone 
rob  me  of  my  Goslings."  Nanabushu  lay  with  bottom  up  ; 
it  was  over  towards  the  cape  he  lay  with  his  bottom  turned. 
Again  he  addressed  his  bottom,  saying:  "Inform  me  if  any 
people  come  paddling  into  view  (round  the  point)."  He 
was  answered  by  his  bottom  saying:  "I  will  inform  you." 


Nanabucu  cigwasa'  aniniba,  a'pidci  cigwa  anibosangwam . 
Ajia'kawabit  Ia8a/u  miskwasap  anicinaba8  sagawa'a-mo':. 
Anicna  ajiklgitut :  "Piwitag  sagawa*a*mog." 


Anicna     owabamawan     Nanabucowan     tcangitiya'kisunit 

5   kaya  li-ci/<u  undabasawanit.      Ajigikitowat  igi/u  anicinabag  : 

"Kagu      udayanatug      Nanabucu      ima      krirndabasawat. 

Ambasano,    wl'kimotimata    wagutugwan    ayagwan    ima   kl- 

'tcangitiya'kisut." 

Anlc,  ml  cigwa  ki'kanonigut  Ini/u  utcitln,  amc  amrrnabit 
10  Nanabucu;  mldac  ajini'kawaba'a-mowat  'i-8!7-11  utclmaniwa, 
mlnawa  cigwa  anibosangwamu  (asa/u  Nanabucu.  Minawa 
ajitibabamawat  Igi/u  anicinabag.  Anic  inabit  'a8a/u  Nana 
bucu  utcitln,  pamagu  mlnawa  anicinaba  pa'u'ndciminawa- 
gurnunit.  "Piwitag  sagawa*a*mowag !"  i'kitowan  utcitln. 


15  Anlc  Nanabucu  anu'rnabit,  anicna  aca  ki'a'ca'u'ta'a'mog 
lgi/u  anicinabag.  "Kaga't  klgaklnawick,"  udinan  lni/u  utcltan. 
Wagunanlwinan  upapasagupinan  Ini/u  utcltan.  u Pamagu 
kaga't  wabamatwaban  lgi/u  anicinabag  kitaklkanoc.  Kagux 
mlnawa  kanocici'kan.  Mini'kigu  wanibayan  niwlniba." 

20  Mlsa  gaga/t  Nanabucu  nibat. 


Midac  li'9i''u  ajikigitowat  igi/u  anicinabag:  "Ambiisa, 
mri/tU  cigwa  klposangwamigwan  a11  Nanabucu."  Cigwa 
ajimadcikwaciwawad  ina'kwaciwawat  Nanabucowan.  Ajiga- 
bawat  aji'ijawat  ima  ckutawaninig.  A'tawa,  panagu  ni- 
25  kansa8  sagisitacino8 !  Wawlp  umo'kawangawawa  'i'8!7'11 
ajikimotimawat  Nanabucowan.  Anlc  matwangwamowan. 
Wawlp  ugicpisitapinawa ;  nayap  tibicko  aji'a-yani'pan  usi- 


175 

Nanabushu  presently  went  off  to  sleep,  he  was  soon  in 
very  deep  slumber.  While  the  bottom  was  watching, 
some  people  came  paddling  into  view  (round  the  point). 
Naturally  then  up  he  spoke:  "Some  visitors  are  paddling 
into  view  (round  the  point)." 

Of  course,  they  saw  Nanabushu  lying  bottom  up,  and 
also  the  smoke  of  his  fire.  Then  up  spoke  the  people : 
"Something  must  Nanabushu  have  yonder  where  the  smoke 
of  his  fire  is  lifting.  Pray,  let  us  go  rob  him  of  whatever 
he  has  yonder  where  he  lies  with  bottom  up." 

Well,  so  when  he  was  addressed  by  his  bottom,  then 
did  Nanabushu  look,  but  to  no  purpose ;  and  so  when 
they  paddled  round  to  the  other  side  of  the  point,  then 
again  into  sound  slumber  did  Nanabushu  fall.  Then  an 
other  look  at  him  the  people  took.  So  while  the  bottom 
of  Nanabushu  was  looking  about,  then  suddenly  again  the 
people  came  into  view  on  the  water.  "Visitors  are  appear 
ing  (round  the  point) !"  said  his  bottom. 

Now,  when  Nanabushu  looked,  it  was  no  use,  for  naturally 
back  did  the  people  turn  their  canoes.  "A  truly  down 
right  liar  you  are,"  he  said  to  his  bottom.  Foolishly  he 
scratched  his  bottom.  "If  you  had  really  seen  the  people, 
you  should  have  spoken  to  me.  Don't  you  speak  to  me 
again.  As  long  as  I  had  intended  sleeping,  so  do  I  wish 
to  sleep."  Thereupon  truly  Nanabushu  went  to  sleep. 

Thereupon  then  said  the  people:  "Come,  now  is  when 
Nanabushu  must  be  sleeping  soundly."  Then  off  they 
started  in  their  canoes,  going  towards  where  Nanabushu 
was.  When  they  landed,  then  they  went  to  where  the 
fire  was.  Ah,  what  a  heap  of  Goslings  with  feet  sticking 
out !  Quickly  they  dug  them  out  of  the  ashes  when  they 
robbed  Nanabushu  of  them.  Now  they  could  hear  the 
sound  of  him  asleep.  Quickly  they  broke  off  the  legs ; 
back  in  the  same  way  as  before  they  placed  their  feet 


ltam    usagisitonawa.      Wawlp    oposi'a'wa    'r8!''11    ni'tansa8, 
mlsa  cigwa  ajimadcawad. 

Cigwasa  kuskusi  Nanabucu ;  ajiclplt,  "Pa',  nindosami- 
gwan.  Kwatcinatawin  ta'irsamisowag  nini'kansimag."  Mlsa 
5  cigwa  uda'pinang  'r8!'-11  pajik  usitani  !ni/u  uni'kansiman, 
mi  nangwana  iu  aji'u-ndcibi'tod  lisi/u  usitani.  "Pabapinisi- 
wagan,  mlsa  gaga't  krirsamisuwat  igiwa  nini'kansimag." 
Minawa  pajik  umamon  lisi/u  usitani,  mlsa  kayabi  aji'U'n- 
dcibitod  48i/u  usitani.  Mldac  li*8i/<u  ajimamot  'i8i/u  mi'tig 

10  ajinantwawangawat ;  awaniban  awlya.  "  Aba'pinisiwagan," 
inandam.  "  Gwa'tcinatawln  ningrkimotimigo  nini'kansimag." 
Mlsa7  undcita  anunantwawangawat.  Wagunaniwinan  nan- 
du'kawatciga ;  kaga't  mi'tawangank  pimi'kawawa8  ki'kaba- 
nigwan  4'8i/>u  anicinaba8.  Misa  cigwa  kf kwaya'kwantank 

1 5  4-8i/>u  krkimotimint.  Wagunaniwinan  ajikacki'tot  udijiba- 
'pasagupinan  Ini/u  utcltan.  Kaga'tsa  unickri'gon  lni/u  utcitin. 
Nanabucu  ajiklgitut :  "Ka,  mawlni  iu  a'tagu  ningatotawasi, 
anawiwln  i'i<u  pa'pasigupinag.  Intawa  ningatcagiswa." 
Nanabucu  ajimadci'tat  mi'tigon  u'kwa'kuwabinang ;  a'pi 

20  kastcipiskananik,  Wagunaniwinan  acinisawa'a'nk  Ickuta,  mlsa7 
i11  tcagiswat  mi/u  utcltan. 


Wibago,    aTc!n,  tcln,  tc!n,  tcln,"  inwawasu. 

Ajiklgitut  Nanabucu:  "Ana/n,  ltcin,  tcP,  tcP,'  kaaTn- 
wayan,  kawindamawisiyan  nini'kansimag  ki'kimotimigowa !" 
25  Mldac  iu  a'pidci  ackalkacank  ka'i'nitanik  'i'8!7'11  utclt,  midac 
iu  aci'kugabawit.  Altawa,  kawln  kanaga  ugacki'tosln  tci- 
pimusat  -,  mlgu  i11  ajimiskwiwinit  li'i/>u  uniciciwa8,  a'pidci 
ugacki'ton  wawasa  a'tod  lni/u  u'katan,  anugutcimadca ; 
miya'ta  i11  aniwack  pang!  ajikaskitot  tongitiya'a'mlt. 


sticking  out.  Quickly  they  put  the  Goslings  into  their 
canoes,  and  then  they  started  away. 

Presently  from  slumber  woke  Nanabushu  ;  as  he  stretched 
(himself),  "Oh,  I  slept  too  long!  It  is  possible  that  over 
done  might  be  my  Goslings."  And  so  when  he  reached  for 
the  foot  of  one  of  his  Goslings,  why,  he  really  pulled  out 
(only)  a  leg.  "Too  bad!  it  is  the  truth  that  too  long  have 
these  Goslings  of  mine  been  cooking."  One  more  foot  he 
took  hold  of,  and  in  the  same  way  he  pulled  out  another  foot. 
Thereupon  taking  a  stick,  he  searched  for  them  digging  in 
the  ashes;  but  there  wasn't  a  single  one.  "Bad  luck,"  he 
thought.  "It  is  possible  that  I  have  been  robbed  of  my 
Goslings."  And  so  with  a  will  he  tried  to  dig  them  out 
(of  the  ashes),  but  with  no  result.  It  occurred  to  him  to  seek 
for  tracks ;  truly,  on  the  beach  were  some  footprints  which 
the  people  must  have  made  when  they  landed.  Thereupon 
now  quite  sure  was  he  that  he  had  been  robbed.  Foolishly 
then  as  much  as  he  could  he  scratched  his  bottom.  Truly 
was  he  angered  by  his  bottom.  Nanabushu  then  said  :  "Ah! 
this  is  not  all  that  am  I  going  to  do  to  him,  even  if  I  am 
scratching  him.  Indeed,  I  will  give  him  a  thorough  burning." 
Nanabushu  then  set  to  work  piling  up  some  wood  ;  when 
a  big  blaze  was  going,  he  then  foolishly  straddled  the  fire, 
whereupon  he  gave  his  bottom  a  good  burning. 

In  a  little  while,  "Tc!n,  tcP,  tcP,  tcP,"  was  the  sound 
(his  bottom)  made  when  being  burned. 

Then  said  Nanabushu:  "Oh,  so  'TcP,  tcP,  tcP,'  was 
what  you  said,  you  who  did  not  inform  me  when  I  was 
being  robbed  of  my  Goslings!"  And  so  when  his  bottom 
was  burned  like  charcoal,  he  then  stepped  away.  Poor 
creature !  not  a  whit  could  he  walk ;  since  he  was  bloody 
at  the  testes,  as  wide  as  was  possible  for  him  to  do  he 
placed  his  feet,  in  vain  he  tried  going  -,  it  was  but  a  short 
distance  he  could  walk  with  feet  apart. 


12 — PUBL.    AMER.    ETHN.    SOC.    VOL.    VII. 


1 78 

Aniwa'kigu  wasa  anttagwicin  ningutingiku  inabit  mi'ti- 
gonsan  ugwa'kitaniwan  ;  wagunanlwinan  udaninlsawa'a'iian. 
Kanigabi'kank  aci'a/banabit ;  a/tawa,  panagu  kamiskwlwa- 
"kwatinig  Ini/u  mi'tigonsan.  Ajikigitut  Nanabucu:  "Miskwa- 
5  blmagon  uga'i'cini'katanawan  Igi/u  anicinabag  mini'k  ka/a-- 
'kiwang  kaya  mini'k  kaglcigowank.  Antagii  ugawusaman- 
tanawa  igi/u  anicinabag,  ugapa'kusiganawa." 


Misax     mmawa     animadca     Nanabucu.       Kaga't     kawin 

o 

ugacki'tosm  anuwl'pimusat,  a'pidci  sitawitiya.    Ningutingiku 

10  papimusat     owabandan    cockwanabi'kanig,    wagunanlwinan 

Nanabucu    ajicockwatciwat.      Ka'kabayabonut,   midac  'i^i'-11 

aci'a-banabit.     A'tiwa,  otomiglwitiyan.    Kaga't  kagwanisagi 

nagwatini.      Nanabucu    ajiklgitut :     "E1,    mlsa    i/u    ka'i'jini- 

lkatamowad      anicinabag,      wa'kunag      uga'i'cini'katanawa. 

i  s   Andaofadac     u^awunsamantanaw7a     li>ci/>u     tci'a*ni'a>lklwansf 

v-/  •  O  •  O  •  •         c7> 

kaya  dac  ugamldcinawa  Igi/u  anicinabag." 


2 1 .  NANABUSHU  AND  THE  CRANBERRIES.1 

Mlsax  Nanabucu  anijimadcat,  aniwa'k  ugacki'ton  tcimi- 
nopimusat.  Kumagu  a'pl  tagucing  siblns  umatabin ;  inabit 
panagu  anlbiminan ;  kamiskwralkubanig  mlgu  siu  anijinazi- 
20  'kang.  "A'tiwa,  kaga'tigu  nlbiwa  ningamldcinan ;  pamagu 
a'pidci  kl'tawlsiniyan  nlngaponi'tonan."  Wi'kwa'tigwayanik 
Nanabucu  ucigabawi  islblns;  inabit  anamibig  midac  kaga't 

1  For  another  version  see  Nos.   13  and   59. 


179 

At  some  distance  away  was  he  come,  when  suddenly, 
on  looking  about,  (he  saw)  some  brambles  standing  in 
dense  growth ;  without  reason  he  walked  straight  through 
their  midst.  After  he  had  passed  through  them,  he  then 
looked  back.  Oh,  how  completely  red  with  blood  were  the 
brambles !  Then  said  Nanabushu :  "  Red  willows  shall  the 
people  call  them  as  long  as  the  world  lasts  and  as  long 
as  there  is  a  sky.  Special  delight  shall  the  people  take 
in  them,  they  shall  use  them  for  a  mixture  in  smoking." 

And  so  on  his  way  continued  Nanabushu.  To  be  sure, 
he  was  not  able  to  walk,  in  spite  of  his  efforts ;  exceedingly 
stiff  was  he  at  the  bottom.  Once  while  going  along  he 
saw  a  place  where  the  rock  was  smooth,  and  then  like 
an  idiot  down  slid  Nanabushu.  When  he  was  come  at 
the  other  end  of  the  slide,  he  accordingly  looked  back. 
Why,  there  were  the  sores  of  his  bottom.  Really  it  was 
a  frightful  thing  to  see.  Nanabushu  then  said:  "Oh,  this 
is  what  the  people  shall  call  it,  lichens  they  shall  call  it. 
And  very  much  shall  they  esteem  it,  and  as  long  as  the 
world  lasts  shall  the  people  also  eat  it  for  food." 

2 1 .   NANABUSHU  AND  THE  CRANBERRIES.1 

Accordingly,  when  Nanabushu  departed  on  his  way, 
hardly  was  he  able  to  walk  with  any  comfort.  After  he 
was  come  a  certain  distance,  he  came  out  upon  a  brook ; 
while  looking  about,  (he  saw)  nothing  but  high-bush  cran 
berries,  and  that  they  were  of  a  red  kind  of  bush.  "Ah,  surely 
a  heap  will  I  eat ;  and  not  till  I  am  thoroughly  satisfied 
with  eating  will  I  leave  them  alone."  By  the  bend  of  the 
brook  Nanabushu  went  and  took  his  stand ;  while  looking 
into  the  stream,  he  then  of  course  saw  high-bush  cranberries 


i8o 

wabandank  anlbiminan  'rrwiti  agawatablgisininik.  Nanabucu 
ajiklgitut:  "Taga,  miwaniwati  kamldciyanin."  Ajitclga'kwaba- 
gisut ;  anunandobiginigat,  rnlsa'  kawln  umi'kanzlnan.  Intawa 
a'kwanabawat  ajimockamut  agwaslit  •  mlgii7  pimi'a'nwa'tinl- 
5  kamisanik.  Inabit,  a'tawa,  mlsa  untcita  anlbiminan  waban 
dank  anamiblg ;  mlgu  mlnawa  tciga'kwapagisut,  a'tiwii 
Nanabucu  acikitcikisklngwacing.  Tci'a-nigu'k  ajikaski'tot 
ijimawi.  Anlcna  klwaskwacin.  Magwagu  mawit  kago 
omanacabiskagun.  Ajiba'katawabit  magwa  mawit,  kuniginln 
10  anlbiminan  nanacabiskagut.  Taya,  gaga't  a'pidcisa  min- 
wantam.  Mlsacigwa  mantantcigat ;  a'pidcisa  katawlsinit 
kaga't  minwantam.  Mldac  kaga't  wawani  kacki'tod  pimusat. 


22.    NANABUSHU  AND  THE  DANCING  BuLLRUSHES.1 

Ningutingigu  papimusat  awiya  onontawa  sasa'kwanit. 
Wagunaniwinan  unasi'tawa.  Kuniginln,  saga-i'gans  sagita- 
15  wanig  fiii  slblns,  mri'ma  ayanit  8rrwa  ininiwa8,  picicig  ci'i'u 
ininiwa8.  Ka'kina  pingwacagitiwa,  kayadac  aci'u'nit  ka'kina 
wabigunln  ubata'kibina-u'ni.  Cigwa  owabamigo.  "A  ecc!, 
Nanabucu,  niwlnlmi'i'timin,  nicwasugun  niwlnlmi'i'timin. 
Ka^a'tio-u  niwlki'tcinimi'i'timin." 

o  o 

20        "  Nistc!mistca,2     mlsagu     8i'i-u    paba'i'nano'klyan,    pabana 
ntanlmri'tlyan.      Ki^ci'a-nigu'k  klgawi'to'koninim." 

1   For  another  version  see  No.  6. 

'2  Ni'tclmi'tca,    "my    little    brothers;"    for   nicima'tug,    a  form  used  by   Nanabushu 
in  addressing  the  people. 


Ibl 

reflected  yonder  in  the  water.  Nanabushu  then  spoke  up : 
"Why,  these  are  the  ones  I  will  eat."  Then  he  dived 
into  the  water ;  in  vain  he  tried  to  feel  for  them  in  the 
water,  but  he  could  not  find  them.  Accordingly,  when 
he  was  out  of  breath,  then  to  the  surface  he  rose  (and) 
came  on  out  of  the  stream  ;  whereupon  the  water  became 
smooth  (again).  As  he  looked,  why,  he  was  bound  to 
see  high-bush  cranberries  down  in  the  water ;  and  so  when 
he  again  dived  into  the  water,  poor  Nanabushu  fell  upon 
his  face,  cutting  a  great  gash.  As  hard  as  it  was  pos 
sible  for  him  did  he  weep.  To  be  sure,  he  was  knocked 
out  of  his  wits  when  he  alighted.  Now,  while  he  wept  he 
felt  something  rubbing  softly  against  his  eyes.  When  he 
opened  his  eyes  while  crying,  he  was  surprised  to  see 
that  he  was  being  gently  rubbed  across  the  eyes  by  high- 
bush  cranberries.  Ah,  truly  was  he  highly  pleased.  And 
so  he  then  began  eating ;  after  he  was  thoroughly  satisfied 
with  the  eating,  he  was  truly  pleased.  Thereupon  he  was 
truly  able  to  travel  comfortably. 

22.   NANABUSHU  AND  THE  DANCING  BuLLRUSHES.1 

And  once,  while  travelling  about,  he  heard  the  sound 
of  some  one  whooping.  Like  a  dunce  he  went  to  where 
he  heard  the  sound.  Lo,  where  out  into  a  pond  flowed 
a  brook  was  the  place  where  those  men  were,  a  vast 
throng  of  men.  They  were  all  nude,  and  they  all  had 
flowers  sticking  upon  (their  heads).  Presently  he  was  seen. 
"Halloo,  Nanabushu!  we  expect  to  dance,  for  eight  days  we 
intend  to  dance.  To  be  sure,  we  hope  for  a  big  dance." 

"My  little  brothers,"  this  is  precisely  what  I  am  travelling 
about  for,  round  about  am  I  seeking  for  a  place  to  dance. 
With  all  (my)  might  will  I  help  you." 


182 

"Nanabucu,  kagu,  kanabatc  kiga'a'ya'kus.     Nicwasugun 
wlnlmitiyang,   migu  kayac,  i  kagabatibi'k  winlmi'i'tiyang." 


"Nistcimistca,   mano,   kaya  nm  nlngammrrti." 
"Nanabucu,    anlc    mano    kaya    kin   kltanim,  kwaya'kigu 
5   kiga'a-ya'kus." 


Anic,  misagu  cigwa  madci'tanit ;  alta,  cigwa  pasigwiwa^. 
Anlc  Nanabucu  kaya  win  klpata'kibina/o'na  Ini/u  misabi- 
gunln.  A'taa,  a'i'cmit  nami-i'ti-i'iiit !  Nanabucu  ketcra'rjit 
nanlmit,  mlsax  kaya  win  tibicko  a'rntotank.  Iskwatci  nro'gun 

10  nami'i'timint  micigwa  ki;kandank  aya/kusit.  Aba'pic  nijwa- 
sugun  nami'i'timint  anicagu  namadabi ;  a'pidci  aiya'kusi, 
kaya  wlwisini.  Aba'pic  anitibi'katinik,  a'pitci  nanontaya- 
gantam  tcibwawabaninig.  Micigwa  Nanabucu  cingicing 
anunlmi'i'tit.  Mindcimigo  tcibltabaninig  ajimawit  Nanabucu. 

15  Apipa'prrnt.  Cigwasax  plwabanini,  cigwa  ima  tibickotca- 
ya'r  pimi-a^kwabanini.  Kunigimn,  kibi'tanimatini.  A'tawa, 
Nanabucu  magwa  cacaganacku'kank,  mmangwana  lni/u 
ka'i'cinank,  anicinabank  ugrrcinanan.  Kaga't  mama'ka- 
dantam  Nanabucu,  mrix*u  kri'nandank  anicinaba  ka'tcino- 

20  tingin,  krrcinang;  mlnangwana  iu  ka'i'jinlmi'i'tiwat  cacagan- 
askon.  Mlsa  ima  cacingicing  Nanabucu,  kawm  okacki'trsi 
tcipimotat  wawicinawm  tcipasigwlt.  Intawa  ajinibat.  A'pl 
nicugun  kanibat  midac  48i/u  pitclnag  kackitot  pimotat, 
ajinatagamayotat. 


1*3 

"Nanabushu,  don't  you  do  it,  perhaps  you  might  grow 
tired.  For  eight  days  we  intend  to  clance,  and  also 
throughout  the  whole  of  every  night  do  we  expect  to 
dance." 

"My  little  brothers,   never  you   mind,   I   too  will  dance." 

"  Nanabushu,  naturally  unconcerned  about  care,  you  too 
should  dance,  but  certainly  you  will  be  tired." 

Well,  so  presently  they  began  ;  ah,  then  they  rose  to 
their  feet.  Now,  Nanabushu  also  wore  large  blossoms 
standing  upon  his  head  (for  feathers).  Oh,  how  they  who 
danced  did  carry  on !  Nanabushu  was  quite  beside  him 
self  when  he  danced,  for  he  did  the  same  (as  the  others). 
At  the  end  of  four  days'  dancing,  he  then  began  to  realize 
that  he  was  tired.  By  the  time  they  (had)  danced  seven 
days,  then  it  was  all  he  could  do  to  sit  down ;  exceedingly 
tired  was  he,  and  he  wanted  to  eat.  By  the  time  that 
night  was  coming  on,  he  grew  deeply  worried  (that  he 
would  not  survive)  before  it  was  day.  So  then  Nanabushu 
lay  down,  trying  in  vain  to  dance.  Just  as  the  dawn  was 
breaking,  then  began  Nanabushu  to  cry.  Then  was  he 
laughed  at.  Presently  came  the  morning,  soon  straight 
overhead  was  how  far  the  light  of  the  morning  had 
come.  Lo,  the  wind  died  down.  Why,  Nanabushu  was 
in  among  the  bullrushes,  that  was  what  he  really  had 
seen,  like  people  they  had  seemed  to  him.  Truly  sur 
prised  was  Nanabushu,  for  he  thought  that  they  were 
people  when  the  wind  was  blowing  hard,  so  it  had  seemed 
to  him ;  as  a  matter  of  fact,  he  had  been  dancing  with 
the  bullrushes.  And  so  there  lay  Nanabushu  for  a  long 
while,  he  was  neither  able  to  crawl  nor  even  to  get  up 
on  his  feet.  Accordingly  he  went  to  sleep.  After  he 
had  slept  for  two  days,  he  then  was  able  to  crawl,  he 
then  crawled  out  to  the  edge  of  the  (swamp). 


1 84 


23.  NANABUSHU  EATS  THE  ARTICHOKES. l 

Ningutingigu  papimotat  owabandan  kago  saga'klnig, 
kuma  omdna'a/n  •,  kago  ajimi'kwani'katank,  kumagu  a'kwani. 
Midac  lisi/u  ajikanotank :  "Kawlnina  kltamagosln  ?  Kinwi- 
zumina?  anln  iu  acini'kasuyag?" 


5        "Askibwa  nintigomin." 

aAnm  ani'ka'kayag  klcpin  nlbiwa  amukoyakun?  Kagona 
kitini'kagam  ?" 

"Kawinsagu;  ninglciwackata'i'wamin,  kaya  dac  nimpogi- 
si'kagamin.  Amc  mlsagu  iu  ani'kagayang." 


10  Nanabucu  oma  ajimadci'tat,  nlbivva  omona'wa  Ii8ixwa 
askibwas ;  acigisibiginat,  ajimadantciga,  wantcitagu  tawlsini. 
A'pidci  nlbiwa  ka^kitamwat  kudcipasigwl.  Kawln  kanaga 
minan  icra*yasl,  kagalt  minumadci'o*.  Ajimadcat,  kaga't 
minopimusa.  Kumagu  alp!  tagwicing  kaga't  kiciwackata. 

i  5  Cigwasa  a'pidci  kiciwackata.  Ningutingigu  magwa  pimusat 
ajipogitit.  Kaga't  kuckupagiso;  ajikwa'kipagisut.  "Awanan 
kanocit?"  Aca  minawa  iwiti  upi'kwanang.  Kaga'pl  umi- 
'tigwabln  uti'kwatawan.  "1AU,  kanociciyu'k."  Magwagu 
wrpimutcigat,  u^pi'kwanang  aca  minawa,  "Pu11!"  Iwiti  u'pi- 

20  'kvvanang  Nanabucu  kawin  kago  owabandanzin.  "Wagu- 
nan  dac  iu  nwantaman  ?"  Acagu  minawa,  mlsagu  paci- 
gwanung  ani'tank.  Kaga'pl  madciba'to,  mlgu  iu  ajikata- 
pagisut,  "PunC,  pun8,  pun8,  pun8,"  inwani.  Ningutingigu 

1  For  another  version  see  No.   12. 


23.   NANABUSHU  EATS  THE  ARTICHOKES. l 

And  once,  when  he  was  crawling  about,  he  saw  some 
thing  that  grew  out  of  the  ground,  accordingly  he  dug  it 
up ;  something  he  then  found  on  digging  it  up,  a  certain 
length  it  extended.  Whereupon  he  then  spoke  to  it,  saying : 
"Are  you  not  eaten  for  food?  Have  you  a  name?  What 
are  you  called?" 

"Artichoke  we  are  called." 

"What  physical  effect  do  you  produce  if  much  of  you 
be  eaten  ?  Do  you  cause  some  sort  of  bodily  ill  ?" 

"Not  at  all;  we  produce  a  pain  in  the  stomach,  and 
we  cause  wind.  Now,  that  is  the  bodily  effect  we  produce." 

Nanabushu  then  here  set  to  work,  he  gathered  many 
artichokes ;  when  he  wiped  them  clean  with  his  hands, 
then  he  began  eating  them,  till  he  was  quite  satisfied  he 
ate.  When  he  had  eaten  a  bountiful  supply  of  them,  he 
tried  to  rise  to  his  feet.  He  was  feeling  very  well,  truly 
very  well  was  he  feeling.  When  he  started  to  go,  really 
he  went  walking  easily.  After  he  was  come  a  certain 
distance,  truly  his  stomach  ached.  Presently  he  had  a  very 
painful  ache  in  the  stomach.  Then  by  and  by,  while 
walking  along,  he  broke  wind.  Truly  was  he  startled  with 
surprise ;  then  he  whirled  about.  "  Who  spoke  to  me  ?" 
(he  said.)  The  same  thing  over  again  (he  heard)  there 
behind  him.  Finally  he  strung  his  bow.  "Now,  do  you 
speak  to  me."  And  as  he  was  going  to  shoot,  then  be 
hind  him  once  again,  "Pii!"  Over  there  at  his  back 
Nanabushu  saw  not  a  thing.  "And  what  do  I  hear?" 
And  the  same  thing  over  again  (he  heard),  and  it  was 
the  same  sound  that  he  heard.  Finally  he  started  running, 
whereupon  at  every  step  he  made,  "Pu,  pu,  pu,  pu,"  was 


i86 

pimipa'tod  kaga'pi  nogiba'to,  kibi'tcisa.  Nanabucu  ajikikitut : 
tttAu,  mlgaciciyu'k !"  Anic  kawm  kago  owabandanzin. 
Ningutingigu  mlnawa  midac  kaga't  anigu'k  ajimadciba'tot, 
misa  untcita,  "PunS,  punt,  pun8,  punt,"  inwanik.  Nanabucu 
5  kibi'tcisa.  Ka'kibi'tcisat,  mi'kwantan  lisi/u  kl'i'gut  Ini/u 
askibwan.  "  Magicananta  nimpogit."  Ani'ajimadcat;  ani- 
nomagaskat  mlnawa  pogiti.  "E1,  nimpogit!  Misa  ka/rcini- 
4katang  pitclnag  ka-a'nipimadisit,  'nimpogit,'  ta'i'kito. 
Papacig  tapogisi'kagawan,  askibwa  ka'kinagu  kago,  kaya 
10  u'pinlg  kaya  wa'kunag." 


24.  NANABUSIIU  AND  THE  WINGED  STARTLERS.1 

Misa7    iu    ajimadcad   Nanabucu  papimusat  •,   kumagu  a'pi 

takncink  owabamas  pinansas  wadiswaning,  a'pidcigu  mocki- 

nawac  i'i'ma  wasiswaning.     Nanabucu  udunabi'tawa,  a'pidci 

ucawanimac.      Udagima    andacinint ;    midaswi  acinPjtaciwa15. 

1 5   Cigwadac   uganona^ :    "  Anln  acini'kasuyag  ?" 


Anic  sagisiwag  Igi/u  pinansag.  Kawm  ugacki'toslnawa55 
tciglkitowat.  Paclg  glkito :  "Kawln  niwlsuslmin." 

Nanabucu  niskatciklgito :  "Anin  kaglcinagwa^  kawlsu- 
siwag?  Klcpin  tibatcimusiwag  acini'kasuyag,  kananiwa- 


20  niri'nim." 


Anic  a'pidci  osagima8 ;   wl'ka  klgitowa8 :    "  Anic,  kuckun- 
gacms  mri'u  ajini'kasoyang." 

1  For  another  version  see  No.    5- 


i87 

•  e  sound  made.  And  once,  as  he  was  running  along,  he 
ime  to  a  sudden  halt,  he  ceased  running.  Nanabushu 
icn  said:  "Now,  do  you  fight  me!"  Of  course,  not  a 
ling  did  he  see.  So  another  time,  when  he  really  started 
>  run  with  all  his  speed,  the  same  thing  happened  as 
efore,  "Pu,  pu,  pu,  pu,"  was  the  sound  that  was  made, 
.anabushu  stopped  in  his  career.  When  running  he  had 
)me  to  a  stop,  he  thought  of  what  he  had  been  told  by 
ic  Artichoke.  "Perhaps  I  am  breaking  wind."  Then  he 
arted  on  his  way  •,  when  he  was  come  a  little  ways, 
o-ain  he  broke  wind.  "  Halloo,  I  am  breaking  wind !  And 
lis  is  what  he  who  will  live  in  the  future  shall  call  it, 
am  breaking  wind,'  he  will  say.  Various  things  will 
lake  (one)  windy,  (such  as)  the  artichoke  and  all  sorts 
f  things,  and  potatoes  and  lichens." 

24.   NANABUSHU  AND  THE  WINGED  STARTLERS.1 

Thereupon  departed  Nanabushu,  travelling  about;  when 
e  was  come  a  certain  distance,  he  saw  some  young  ruffed 
rouse  in  a  nest,  and  very  full  they  filled  the  place  in 
le  nest.  Nanabushu  sat  down  beside  them,  very  tender 
ras  his  feeling  for  them.  He  counted  how  many  they 
rere ;  twelve  was  their  number.  And  then  he  spoke  to 
hem,  asking:  "By  what  name  are  you  called?" 

Naturally  afraid  were  the  little  ruffed  grouse.  Not  were 
hey  able  to  speak.  One  spoke  up:  "We  have  no  name." 

Nanabushu  spoke  in  an  angry  way :  "  How  is  it  possible 
or  you  not  to  have  a  name?  If  you  do  not  tell  me  what 
oti  are  called,  I  will  club  you  to  death." 

Naturally  much  did  he  alarm  them ;  after  a  long  while 
hey  said:  "Why,  Little  Frightener  is  the  name  we  are 
ailed." 


i88 

"Oun,"    Nanabucu    i'kitu ;    "mlnangwana    iu!"   ajipasigwit 

Nanabucu ;    acinisawawat    acimldcinat.      Panagu    kawasibi- 

ltonit,    Nanabucu   uganona8 :    "Napisawugu  kuckungacins!1 

Mun !"    inwa    Nanabucu    ajigi'tciba'pra/t.      "Wawani  wlnda- 

5   mawi'k  kimama'i'wa  tagwicing." 


Mlsagu  iu  anlcimadcat  Nanabucu  ;  pacugu  anitagwicing, 
panagu  micawabaminagwatini  a'i'cat.  "Undcitamawin 
saga'i'gan  madablyan,"  inandam.  Kaga't  saga'i'gan  uma- 
dabin,  a'pidcisa7  kickabi'kani.  Kaga't  nawinagvvatini  'is:i/u 

10  nibi.  Kagatsa  unicicinini  mri'ma  ugidabi'k.  A'pidci  i'i'ma 
agoklckabi'kanig  ka'rcat,  aciwanlnigatanit  Nanabucu  ajikl- 
gitut :  "A'tiwa,  ambagicsa  abating,  mamwa'tcigu  wackinlgit 
a'r'kwa  abating,  kayagu  ta'ta'kutcingwanat,  a'pidcigu  kaya 
minugit ;  undcitamawin  ninta'i'cikwaskun,  awagwan  ka'i'ci- 

15  kwaskunigwan  mra/lUak  awldigamat  i'kitung  a'i^kwa.  Kwa- 
ya'kigu  ninta/rcikwaskun."  Migu  mlnawa  aciwanlnigatanit. 
"Undcita  ninta/rcikwa'skun." 


Cigwadac  iwiti  pina  upltawa^  kamidcinit  unidcanisaL\  anm 
ka'i'cinawat   unldcanisa1*' !      A'tawa,  wantagu   kawusibi'tonit. 
20   "Awanac  ka'i'niga'i'nak." 
"Nanabucu." 
"Kagona  kitigowaban  ?" 

"'Anin    acini'kasuyag?'    i'kito.      'Kuskungacins,'    nintina- 

naban,   mldac   lici/u  ka'i'cimldciclyangit.     A'pidac  animadcat 

25   ki'tciba'pri'gunan.      Ninglkanonigunan    dac :   'Wawani  wln- 

1  Napisawugu  kuckungacins!  "Yes,  you  are  a  little  frightener!"  This  could 
have  been  given  in  other  ways;  as,  "Like  the  deuce  you  are  a  little  frightener!" 
"The  idea  of  your  being  a  little  frightener!"  etc. 


"Oh,"  Nanabushu  said;  "that  is  it!"  Then  up  to  his 
feet  rose  Nanabushu  ;  standing  over  them  with  legs  spread 
apart,  he  eased  himself  upon  them.  (Observing)  them 
suddenly  groping  about  in  the  slush,  Nanabushu  addressed 
them,  saying:  "Yes,  you  are  a  little  frightener !  l  Phew!" 
exclaimed  Nanabushu,  laughing  heartily  at  them.  "Cor 
rectly  inform  your  mother  when  she  arrives." 

And  so  upon  his  way  went  Nanabushu;  when  a  little 
way  on  his  journey  he  was  come,  immediately  a  wide 
view  opened  out,  whither  he  was  bound.  "It  seems  as  if 
out  upon  a  lake  I  am  coming,"  he  thought.  In  truth,  out 
upon  a  lake  he  came,  and  there  was  a  very  steep  precipice. 
Truly  distant  was  the  sight  of  the  water.  Really  beautiful 
was  it  there  on  the  summit.  When  he  had  gone  over 
to  the  very  edge  of  the  cliff,  then  about  over  the  verge 
Nanabushu  swung  his  leg,  saying :  "  Ah,  would  that  there 
were  a  wager,  and  that  a  particularly  youthful  woman 
were  up  as  the  prize,  and  that  she  were  short  from  the 
knee  to  the  groin,  and  that  she  were  of  a  very  handsome 
figure !  if  such  could  be,  I  would  jump  off,  if  it  were  said 
of  the  woman  that  whosoever  would  leap  off  would  be 
the  one  to  have  her  for  a  wife.  Actually  would  I  jump 
off."  And  so  again  he  swung  his  leg  out  over  the  cliff. 
"For  a  purpose  would  I  leap  off." 

And  when  at  yonder  place  the  Ruffed  Grouse  was  come, 
fetching  home  to  her  children  some  food  for  them  to  eat, 
how  was  she  to  find  her  children  !  Oh,  they  were  com 
pletely  submerged  in  it.  "Who  has  done  you  the  injury?" 

"Nanabushu." 

"Were  you   told  something?" 

"'By  what  are  you  called?1  he  asked.  'Little  Frightener,' 
we  said  to  him,  and  thereupon  was  when  we  were  eased 
upon.  And  when  he  started  away,  we  were  very  much 
laughed  at.  And  we  were  told :  'Correctly  inform  your 


damawi'k  kimama'rwa  tagwicin/     Midac  lisi/u  ka'a'nicimad- 
cat  ajiklgitut .   'Napisana  kuskungaclns !'   nintigunan." 

A'taya,  pina  unawataman  pacig  kaya  udoda'pinan  pacig ; 
acipasigirirt,  saga'i'ganlng  udiciwinan  kislblginat.  Misa  iu 
5  ka'i'ciplni'a't,  mlsagwa'pana  ka'totawat  pmic  acimnc  tacinit. 
Unltcanisafi  ka'kina  ka/ijikislblginat,  aba'pic  ka'klji'tat,  aji- 
kikitut :  "Ambasa7,  ninganosunaswa  'asa/u  Nanabucu,  kaya 
win  wawiyoc  niwltotawa."  Ajimadcat  omada'a'nan.  Nin- 
gutingigu  mi'i  ma  tayoc  udabi'tawan  madwakaglkitonit  Ini/u 
10  Nanabucowan.  Tiwa,  undcita  guca  inabit  na'i'ta  pimiwa- 
ninigatanowan.  Pina  inandam  :  "Wlkaga  minawa  tatotam." 
Nawatc  pacux  anri'ca.  Cigwa  minawa  uniniganiwan  wagu- 
nanlwinan  acipasiguut  •  a'pidci  i'i'ma  tclgitawak  ani-i-cisawan, 
pamagu  Nanabucu  ka'i'nitank:  "T!"1 


15  Alta,  Nanabucu  tabasi,  a'tawa  ajika'kabi'kisat,  anicagu 
kaco'kanig  lni/u  u'tawagan.  Alta,  ajipangicing  nibrkang, 
"Tcamu/,"  inwawakamicin.  A'ta,  ki'tciwi'ka  papimakotcing 
mica'kisat.  Midac  iu  kamica'klsat,  ki^ci'a'-nigu'k  klslntci- 
'kaml  •  agawa  mockamo,  a'pidci  kaga  waya'kwanamu. 


20  Anic  mri/>u  pina  namadabit  kanawabamat  Nanabucowan. 
Cigwa  mockamowan,  taya,  mlgu  iwiti  kaplnabinit  klgitowan  : 
"I1,  kagatsa  kuckungaci."  Alta,  Nanabucowan  madwaba- 
lpiwan.  "Pina,  ml  gwaya'k  totawiyan  kimldcinagwa  lgi/u 


t]ie  jjps^  imitating  the  whir  of  the  grouse  in   flight. 


191 

mother  when  she  arrives.'  And  so  when  he  was  setting 
out,  he  then  said:  'Yes,  you  are  a  little  frightener!'  we 
were  told." 

Well,  the  Ruffed  Grouse  took  up  one  with  her  mouth 
and  another  with  her  claws  •,  then,  flying  up,  to  a  lake 
she  carried  them  to  wash  them.  And  when  she  had  made 
them  clean,  then  the  same  thing  she  did  to  the  rest  until 
(she  had  finished  with)  the  twelve.  When  she  had  made 
all  her  children  clean,  and  by  the  time  she  was  done  with 
her  work,  then  she  said:  "Now,  then,  I  am  going  to  follow 
up  Nanabushu,  and  I  intend  doing  him  a  trick  too." 
When  she  started,  she  followed  his  trail.  So  by  and  by 
she  came  within  hearing  distance  of  Nanabushu,  who  still 
could  be  heard  talking.  Ah,  it  was  precisely  at  the  moment 
she  looked  when  he  was  swinging  his  leg  out  over  (the 
precipice).  The  Ruffed  Grouse  thought:  "Would  that  he 
might  do  it  again  !"  Nearer  to  the  place  she  went.  When 
again  he  was  making  ready  (to  swing  his  leg),  she  hap 
pened  then  to  fly  up ;  ever  so  near  past  his  ear  she  flew, 
and  suddenly  Nanabushu  heard  the  sound  of  UT!" 

Well,  Nanabushu  dodged,  but  unfortunately  over  the 
precipice  he  fell,  going  so  fast  that  the  wind  went  whistling 
past  his  ears.  Ah,  when  he  fell  into  the  water,  "Team" 
was  the  sound  of  his  fall  there.  Oh,  for  a  great  while 
was  he  falling  through  the  water.  And  so  when  he  got 
to  the  bottom,  all  his  strength  he  used  in  pushing  back 
up  to  the  surface ;  barely  was  he  able  to  reach  the  surface, 
almost  was  he  on  the  very  point  of  losing  his  breath. 

Naturally  there  was  the  Ruffed  Grouse  seated  watching 
Nanabushu.  When  he  came  to  the  surface,  ah,  then  up 
from  where  he  fell  he  looked,  saying:  "Well,  (that)  really 
is  a  little  frightener."  Oh,  how  Nanabushu  could  be  heard 
laughing!  "Ruffed  Grouse,  it  was  right  what  you  did  to 


kimtcanisag.        Kawm     wi'ka     mlnawa     ninga*i'cictcigasi.: 
Mlsa'  ajra-gwa'tat   Nanabucu,   ajinadcat  papimusat. 


25.  NANABUSHU  AND  THE  GREAT  FISHER. 

Ningutinggigu  papimusat  awlya  onontawan  madwanaga- 

munit.      A'pidcisa    uminu'tawan.      "A'tiwa,    ambagicsa  wa- 

5   bamag   awagwanlwigwan   laca/u  nagamut.      Ambasa,   ninga- 

wikagwawabama,"  inandam.    Ajimadcat  Nanabucu.    Aba'pic 

payacu'tawat,    undcitasawin    kawln    pacigwanung    ayasltug 

ani'tawSt.     Cigwasa  pacti7  owabandan  ki'tcigami,  kunigimn 

miciwutclgan  ayacawikwaskwaniwan  'ieiu  kistcigami.     Midac 

10   'i^i^1    sasipuckanik   48i/u  kistcigami   midac  ima  ayacawikwas- 

kuninit,   pa'kicidac  nagamowan : 


"Ki'tcigani  sasi'pu'kag, 

Ki"tcigtimi  sasi'pu'kag," 

ina'a-mon. 
15        Kaga't  uminwaniman.    "Ambagicsa  kaya  nm  kacki'toyan 

tci'i-cictcigayan.      Kawln    nin    nintayanicfta^zl.      Kawlnina, 

Miciwutcig,  nindakacki'tosln  4isi/u  tcrrcictcigayamban  ?" 
"Nanabucu,  mawica  nimadci^tanaban  i'i'wa  untaminoyan. 

'Au,     kini'tam    ijictcigan.       A'pidci    nimpa'kada.       A'kawa 
20  nlwi'a'ntawantan   Ii8i/u  wamltciyan.      Kini'tamidac  kayayaca- 

wikwaskwan.       Mlsai'i'11     cigwa    tcimadci'tayan,     Nanabucu 

kagux    win    babini'tagan    wa-rninan.     Mlgu^i'"    monjag  tci- 

nagamuyan  : 

"  'Ki'tcigami  sasi'pu'kag, 
25  Ki'tcigami  sasi'pu'kag,' 

tclna'a'man.      Kicpin, 


193 

me  for  easing  upon  your  children.  Never  again  will  I 
do  so."  And  so  when  out  of  the  water  came  Nanabushu, 
then  off  he  started  walking  about. 

25.   NANABUSHU  AND  THE  GREAT  FISHER. 

And  once,  while  walking  about,  he  heard  the  voice  of 
some  one  singing.  Much  was  he  pleased  with  the  tune 
(of  the  singer).  "Ah,  would  that  I  might  see  who  the 
singer  is !  I  say,  I  am  going  to  try  to  see  (who  it  is)," 
he  thought.  Then  off  went  Nanabushu.  By  the  time  he 
was  in  close  hearing  distance  of  him,  it  seemed  by  the 
way  he  heard  him  that  the  being  was  not  in  any  one 
place.  When  he  had  a  near  view  of  the  sea,  lo,  (he  saw) 
a  great  fisher l  leaping  back  and  forth  across  the  sea. 
It  was  at  the  coming-together  of  the  shores  of  the  sea 
where  to  and  fro  he  leaped,  at  the  same  time  he  sang : 

"The  shores  of  the  sea  meet  together, 
The  shores  of  the  sea  meet  together," 

(such)  was  the  song  he  sang. 

Truly  was  he  pleased  with  him.  "Would  that  I  might 
be  able  to  do  that  too !  I  would  not  cease.  Might  I 
not  be  able,  O  Fisher!  to  do  that?" 

"Nanabushu,  long  ago  I  began  this  that  I  am  playing. 
Very  well,  take  your  turn  at  doing  it.  Very  hungry  am  I. 
In  the  mean  while  I  want  to  look  for  something  to  eat. 
So  take  your  turn  at  leaping  across  back  and  forth. 
Therefore  now  you  may  begin,  Nanabushu.  Do  not  do 
otherwise  than  what  I  have  told  you.  Therefore  always 
should  you  sing  : 

"  'The  shores  of  the  sea  meet  together, 
The  shores  of  the  sea  meet  together/ 

(thus)  you  should  sing.      If 

1  The  constellation  of  the  Great  Dipper  is  called  the  "Fisher  star,"  and  this  is 
the  Great  Fisher  referred  to  here. 

13— FUEL.    AMER.    ETHN.    SOC.    VOL.    VII. 


I94 

"  'Ki'tcigami  taski'kag, 
Ki'tcigami  taski'kag,' 

ina*a*man,     mldac    iu    kanabatc    klganisabawa."      Misa7    iu 
cigwa  animadcanit. 
5        Nanabucu  ajimadcra/nk : 

"Ki'tcigami  sasipu'kag, 
Ki'tcigami  sasipu'kag." 

Migu  i11  gaga/t  ajisipuskanik.  Alta,  kaga'tsa  minwantam. 
Mlsax  kabagicig  kawln  anicf  tanzl  acawigwaskwanit.  Aba'pic 

10  tabi'katinig,  mlsa7  gu  kaya  kabatibi'k ;  wayabaninig  kawln 
kanaga  wra'nacrtanzl.  Awandcis  ba'pinantam.  Cigwa 
unagucinini,  mlcigwa  aya'kusit  Nanabucu.  Ningutingigu 
oglmi'kwandan  :  "Amantcigic  lici/u  kawundcri^kitut,  tKagu/ 
win  ina'a-ngan.'"  Wagunaniwinan.  Nanabucu  ajawik- 

15   waskwanit, 


"Ki'tcigami  taski'kag, 
Ki'tcigami  taski'kag," 

ina'a/m.  Wantagu  nawagam  pangicin.  Anic  acisikwasat. 
Anumockamut  inabit,  kawln  kanaga  pima4kamigansininik. 
20  Mlnawa  anugwa'kagumu,  mlsa/  undcita  kawln  o\vabandanzin 
kifiiu  tcipima'kamiganik.  "Paba/pinisiwagan,  mlsa  gaga't 
nibuyan  !"  Wagunaniwinan  ajikaski'tot  tciplpagi :  "  Mici- 
•u'tclg!"  Anigu'k  plpagi. 


Magwagu  baba'tana'kamigisit  awiya  onontawan  madwa- 

25   bipaginit.      "Mlmawina'a'11    Nanabucu,"  inandam.      Pinicigu 

madwamawiwan    Ini/u    Nanabucowan.      A'ta,    intawasa  ma- 

dciba'to    ki^tci'a'nigfu'k.       Ci^wa    madabiba'to    Micru'dclof, 

o  o  •  fc> " 


195 

"  'The  shores  of  the  sea  draw  apart, 
The  shores  of  the  sea  draw  apart,' 

you    should    sing,    then  perhaps  you  might  drown."     And 
then  he  departed  on  his  way. 
Nanabushu  then  began  singing : 

"The  shores  of  the  sea  meet  together, 
The  shores  of  the  sea  meet  together." 

Whereupon  truly  the  shores  came  together.  Oh,  truly 
happy  was  he!  And  so  throughout  the  day  he  did  not 
cease  leaping  back  and  forth  across.  And  when  night 
came  on,  it  was  the  same  the  whole  night  long;  when 
the  morning  came,  not  a  whit  was  he  anxious  to  stop. 
Increasing  joy  he  got  from  it.  When  it  was  growing 
evening,  then  was  Nanabushu  becoming  weary.  Then  he 
happened  on  a  sudden  thought :  "  Wonder  why  it  is  he 
said,  'Don't  you  sing  (the  other  way)' !"  But  foolishly,  as 
Nanabushu  leaped  across, 

"The  shores  of  the  sea  draw  apart, 
The  shores  of  the  sea  draw  apart," 

he  thus  sang.  And  in  the  very  centre  of  the  sea  he 
fell.  So  down  (out  of  sight)  he  fell.  When  on  coming 
up  to  the  surface  he  tried  to  look  about,  there  was  not 
a  single  bit  of  shore-line  to  be  seen.  Again  he  vainly 
tried  turning  the  other  way,  but,  just  as  before,  he  did 
not  see  the  shore-line.  "Woe  is  me,  for  now  surely  I 
shall  die!"  In  distress  he  called  out  as  loud  as  he  could: 
"O  Great  Fisher!"  with  a  loud  voice  he  called. 

Now,  while  (the  Fisher)  was  roaming  about,  he  heard 
the  voice  of  some  one  calling  aloud.  "That  must  be 
Nanabushu,"  he  thought.  Then  presently  (he  heard)  the 
voice  of  Nanabushu  crying.  Ah,  accordingly  then  he 
started  running  at  full  speed.  Wrhen  the  Great  Fisher 
came  running  out  upon  (the  sea),  why,  there  was  Nana- 


196 
actawa,     Nanabucowan    nanawiki8tci£ami    madwamawiwan. 

o  • 

"Cici,  indacka  mrru  anugrirndcibwamit  'a8a/u  Nanabucu." 
Anic  pisanigu  madcra/m  Mlcru'dcig.  Ajikwaskwanit  misa' 
undcita  aci'a'yanik  sipuskanik. 

Mlsa  cio^wa  Nanabucu  kPa'o-wa'tat.      Kaga't  minwantam 

O  •     O  O 

Nanabucu.  "Aa,  Mlci'irdclg,  kaga't  inangwana  kimanidowi. 
Magica  nlna'ta  nimanidowi  nintinantanaban.  Intawasa7  kin 
kigazazrkis.  Mlsax  Ii8i/u  ka'i'cinaganinan,"  Nanabucu 
ajimadcra'cagamat  lici/u  ki'tcigami. 


26.   NANABUSHU  AND  WINDIGO. 

10  Ningutingigu  papimacagamat  Inabit  iwiti  agamikistci- 
gami  awiya  owabaman  48i/u  pimacagamanit,  a'pidcisa  min- 
ditowan.  Kawln  kanaga  a'konlngitawitiyanit  a'kosislwan 
48i/u  mi'tigo8.  Anic,  mlwanini11  Windigo.  Wagunaniwinan 
upipagiman :  "Nicimisa,  watcaka-a'a-nowan  kamamldcita- 

15  man!  Pamacagamayan,  woi1 !"  anic,  nama  wasa  inantam 
Nanabucu. 


A'pidcidac  unickimigon  Windigo  Nanabucowan.    "Kaga't 
mama'katc.   Kuniga,  'Nlna'ta  nimanitowi,'  inanamutug  'aV11 
Nanabucu.      Ambasano,    ningaglwi'tagamaba'to."      Kaga't 
20  madciba'to    Windigo,    ki'tciwlba    udddi'tan    ima   pimacaga 
manit    mi/u    Nanabucowan.      Wagunaniwinan    acitcangitiya- 


i97 

bushu  to  be  heard  crying  exceedingly  far  out  on  the  water. 
"There,  that  is  on  account  of  Nanabushu's  failing  to  heed 
(my  words)."  So  then  softly  began  the  Great  Fisher  to 
sing.  When  over  he  leaped,  then  back,  as  it  did  before, 
came  (the  shores  of  the  sea)  together. 

Thereupon  then  Nanabushu  came  out  of  the  water. 
Truly  pleased  was  Nanabushu.  "Ah,  Great  Fisher!  really 
indeed  you  are  a  manitou.  That  perhaps  I  was  the  only 
manitou,  was  the  thought  I  entertained  heretofore.  Accord 
ingly  you  are  to  be  older  (than  I).1  Therefore  shall  I  now 
leave  you."  Nanabushu  then  went  his  way  along  the  shore 
of  the  sea. 

26.   NANABUSHU  AND  WINDIGO. 

And  once,  while  walking  along  the  shore  (and)  looking 
towards  the  other  side  of  the  sea,  he  saw  one  passing 
along  the  coast,  tremendously  huge  was  the  being.  No 
where  near  to  his  buttocks  were  the  trees  in  their  height. 
Well,  of  course  it  was  Wlndigo.  Like  a  fool  he  called 
aloud  to  him  :  "  O  my  younger  brother !  upon  the  dry  tail 
of  a  beaver  did  you  ease  yourself.  You  passer  along  the 
shore,  halloo  !"  Well,  at  a  safe  distance  away  Nanabushu 
thought  (he  was). 

Now,  very  angry  was  Wlndigo  made  by  Nanabushu. 
"It  is  really  absurd.  Perhaps  'I  am  the  only  manitou 
existing,'  may  be  Nanabushu's  thought.  Well,  I  will  run 
round  (to  where  he  is),  keeping  to  the  shore."  Truly  off 
went  running  Wlndigo,  in  a  very  little  while  he  arrived 
at  the  place  where  Nanabushu  was  coming  along  the 
shore.  What  did  Wlndigo  do  but  get  down  and  lay  with 
his  bottom  up.  It  was  but  a  short  while  when  up  came 

1  The  passage  is  given  literally.  The  sense  is,  "being  older,  you  are  a  greater 
manitou  than  I." 


198 

cing  laEa/u  Wlndigo.  Nagatcigu  cigwa  pagamacagamawan 
Nanabucowan.  Cigwa  owabamigon ;  anm  ga'i'cinang  awiya 
kltcangitiyacinon.  Mlgu  iu  anawri'cigaso'tawat  omadwa- 
kanonigon  Nanabuco:  "Ondas,  a'kawa,  ninganawatcln  lisi/u 
5  klya/u.  Wawip,  ontas." 

A'tawa,  Nanabucu  anigagimota'tamo  anin^zi'kawat. 
Cigwa  ima  ododisan  ;  kagatsa  mangitcitlwan,  micicagu  liL'i/u 
oda'i'ni.  Uganonigon :  "Nanabucu,  manisan.  Ninga'a'- 
'kawa-a-bwan  lisi/u  klya/u." 

10  Kaga't  ajigu'plt  Nanabucu  manisat.  A'tawa,  mojag 
mawi.  Cigwasa  nlbiwa  ka/ir'kwa'kwisi'tod  ini/u  misan, 
uganonigon:  aMri>u  icibodawan." 

Nanabucu    ajibodawat.      Ka'podawat    uganonigon:    "Na 
nabucu,  mri/>u  ici'a'ntawabantan  'i^'wa  kawatabwana'kuyan 
15   lisi/u    klyawic.      A'pidci    wana'kwa'k,    magica    tagita'kwitin 
'i^i'11  kiwisancis." 

Kaga't    animadca    Nanabucu.      Anlc    mocag  mawi,   a'pl- 

tcisagisit.      A'pidcigu  'i^^wa  wayanina'kwatinik  'i^i'wa  mi'tig 

umi'kan,    kaya    iu    sasagati'kwaniwaninik.      Ajimadcat    icat 

20  acimlnat ;  o'o*  udinan  :  "Tawa't,  tawa't,  tawa't  !W1   A'rnditcin 

laVu  Nanabuco. 

"Kawminawm  tagita'kwitin  iwa  kiwlsancic?  Ba'kanag  iwa 
mi'tig  nandawabandan,  wana'kwak." 


A'tawa     Nanabucu.       Midac     gagat    animawit,    pmicigu 
25   wasa    anitagucin.       Pamagu    anrrnabit,    ta'tiwa,    cingusan 
klbimiba'towan  ajiganonat :   "  Nistclmistca,  mnip  nongum." 

1  Tawa't,   tawact,  t.awact !    "Oh,  oh,  oh!"   a  masculine  exclamation  denoting  anger, 
often  applied   angrily  to  dogs  when  in  the  way  or  when  disobedient. 


i99 

Nanabushu  to  where  he  was  on  the  shore.  Then  (by 
Nanabushu)  was  he  observed ;  what  was  he  to  see  but 
somebody  lying  with  bottom  pointing  up.  Accordingly, 
when  he  made  an  attempt  to  hide  from  him,  Nanabushu 
heard  (Wlndigo)  saying  to  him:  "Come  hither,  wait,  I 
want  to  make  a  small  meal  out  of  you.  Make  haste,  come!" 

Alas !  Nanabushu  began  weeping  silently  on  his  way 
over  to  where  (Wlndigo)  was.  Presently  he  came  to  where 
(Wlndigo)  was ;  truly  big  was  his  anus,  and  in  plain  view 
was  his  heart.  By  him  was  he  addressed,  saying:  "Nana 
bushu,  go  gather  some  fire-wood.  I  will  first  roast  your  body." 

Truly  then  up  from  the  shore  went  Nanabushu  to  gather 
fire-wood.  Poor  fellow!  all  the  while  was  he  crying.  After 
he  had  piled  up  much  fire-wood,  he  was  addressed:  "Now, 
do  you  kindle  a  fire." 

Nanabushu  then  kindled  the  fire.  After  he  had  kindled 
the  fire,  he  was  addressed:  "Nanabushu,  now  go  you 
hence  to  seek  for  something  which  I  can  use  for  a  spit 
to  roast  your  old  body  on.  (Let  it  be)  very  straight,  else 
perhaps  your  old  spleen  might  be  forced  out." 

Truly  away  went  Nanabushu.  Now,  all  the  time  was 
he  weeping,  he  was  so  scared.  So  a  stick  with  a  very 
big  curve  he  found,  and  it  had  many  twigs.  Then  he 
started  going  over  to  give  it  to  (Wlndigo);  this  he  said  to 
him:  "Oh,  oh,  oh!"  l  Such  was  the  way  Nanabushu  acted. 

"Would  not  your  old  spleen  be  forced  out  by  that? 
For  a  different  one  do  you  seek,  one  that  is  straight." 

Hapless  Nanabushu !  Thereupon  truly  off  he  went 
crying,  (going)  till  he  a  long  way  off  was  come.  And 
suddenly,  while  looking  about  as  he  went,  why,  here  was 
a  Weasel  whom  he  addressed  as  it  went  running  past: 
"My  little  brother,  I  am  now  going  to  die." 


2OO 

Kibi'tcisawan  ini/u  cingusan.  Ota'taganabamigon  ajiga- 
nonigut :  "Nanabucu,  wagunac  wa/u-ndcinibuyan?" 

"A'tawa,   migimnri7'11  wra^kawinawatclt  waca/u   Windigo 
liBi/u  mya/u.      Kawmina  kitanisasi?"     Ajiganonigut :   "Nama- 
5   dapinagu   laVu   Windigo?" 

"Kawm,  tcangitiyacin,  micicago  iwa  utclt,  kaya  liv:i/u  uta." 

"  Nanabucu,  mmotcisa  ningawikagwanisa.  Maskwati 
dac  win  klgapagusanimin  kago.  Intawa  dac  kicpin  kago 
totawisiwan  kawm  nintanisasi." 

10  Klgitowan  Nanabucowan  :  "Maskwat  kicpin  nisat,  tcipi- 
cagantaman  lisi/u  klya/u  klga'i'ci-i-n."  Ajikanonint  Nana- 
buco :  aMri/>u  icipindomun  ^iYwa.  niyawic." 

A'taya,  kaga't  minwantam  Nanabucu.  lPi/u  abwana'k 
wanicicininik  (i}lwa  mi'tig  antawabandank,  kaya  a'pidci 
1 5  wana'kwutinig ;  mldac  'ici/u  ka/klcka'arnk.  Aniji  madcitot, 
kayabi  kltcangitiyacinon  miwa  Wlndigon.  Uganonan  : 
"O'o'wa  udabwana'kun."  Mldac  ima  ajigitcibagwlt  Ini/u 
cingusan,  panagu  ani'irtanawasanit.  "A'tawa,  ambasano 
klni'tam  kiga'irji'ton  iyabwana'k." 


20        "Kawm,"  udigon  mi/u  Wlndigon:    "kinigu  uji'ton." 

Nanabucu  udoda'pinan  iiwa  mi'tig ;  pitclnagigu  wata- 
'pinang  uganonigon :  "Kawasa,  Nanabucu,  ningi'tcisasa- 
gita'a*.  Nintigwa  awiya  uwipa'kandan  'i^'i'wa  ninta'a-yap." 

Nanabucu    uganonan :    "Kacitina    unaka'kirirtcin.      Wa- 
25   wlpigu    apwan  iu  nlya/u.      Kama  gaya  wlsasa'ku'kwataman 
iwa  mya/u." 


2OI 


In  its  flight  stopped  the  Weasel.  By  it  was  he  gazed 
up  at  when  by  it  he  was  addressed:  "Nanabushu,  why 
are  you  going  to  die?" 

"Alas!  because  a  light  meal  does  that  Wlndigo  intend 
to  make  of  my  body.  Could  you  not  kill  him?"  Then 
he  was  addressed  by  it  saying :  "  And  is  the  Wlndigo 
sitting  down  ?" 

"No,  he  lies  with  bottom  pointing  upward,  and  in  full 
view  is  his  anus,  likewise  his  heart." 

"Nanabushu,  nevertheless  I  will  try  to  slay  him.  And 
as  a  reward  for  myself  I  shall  expect  some  kind  of  blessing 
from  you.  So,  therefore,  if  you  fail  to  do  something  for 
me,  I  would  not  kill  him." 

Up  spoke  Nanabushu:  "As  your  reward  for  killing  him, 
I  will  make  you  proud  of  yourself."  Then  was  Nanabushu 
told:  "Therefore  do  you  put  me  in  the  bosom  of  your 


garment." 


Ah,  truly  pleased  was  Nanabushu.  The  roasting-spit 
which  he  sought  to  find  was  of  excellent  wood  and  very 
straight ;  and  that  was  what  he  had  cut.  When  he  went 
thither  taking  it  to  him,  still  yet  was  Wlndigo  lying  with 
bottom  pointing  up.  He  spoke  to  him,  saying:  "Here  is 
your  spit."  Then  it  was  that  he  pulled  the  Weasel  forth 
from  the  bosom  of  his  garment,  and  away  whirled  its  tail 
as  it  flew  in.  "Oh,  well!  then  do  you  take  a  turn  at 
making  a  roasting-spit." 

"No,"   he  was  told  by   Wlndigo:    "do   you   make  it." 

Nanabushu  took  up  the  stick ;  as  soon  as  he  picked  it 
up,  he  was  addressed  by  the  other  saying:  "Impossible, 
Nanabushu,  my  heart  beats  with  great  fear.  It  seems  as 
if  something  is  about  to  bite  off  the  cord  of  my  heart." 

Nanabushu  addressed  him,  saying:  "Make  haste  and 
impale  me  upon  (the  spit) !  Hurry  and  roast  my  body ! 
Or,  if  you  wish,  you  may  fry  my  body." 


202 

Minawa  klgitowan  :  UE[,  kawasa,  Nanabucu!  kawasa 
knca.  Ml  guca  kaga't  H/>u  wiwanantaman." 

Nanabucu  oma  udaniga'kikabiwi'tawan.  "Ocrcr,  kaci- 
tina  unaka'kirirtcin !"  inabit  Nanabucu,  acikawa'kwitiya- 
5  sanit ;  mlsagu  4i8i/u  kaga't  kra'ninibunit.  Kanibunit  pi'irn- 
dcisagitcisawan  cingusan. 


"A'tawa,  nicimisa !  amantcigic  a'pidci  ka-i'cimamoyawa- 
kantamogubanan  ?  Intawasa7  ningawawaci-a'."  Nanabucu 
udoda'pinan  aciglslblga'wat.  A'pidcisa  ka'plnabawanat, 
TO  wagunaniwinan  wapapiganan  unatawabaman.  Kami'kawat 
nawatc  utcagiswan  mi/u  wababiganan.  A'pidci  ka'i'jiwa- 
bickisinit  ka'klci'a't,  mldac  Ii8i/u  misiwa  aciwawacra't  cin 
gusan  ;  wana'kwano  uma'katawanawanan.  "Ningataga 
kagwatciba'ton." 


15        Kaga't  cingus  kagwatciba'to.    A'tiwa,  kaga't  piciganimu. 

Nanabucu    uganonan :    "Mi'saguna    iu    acimamoyawaminan. 

Ninibunaban    cingus.      Mldac    iu   ka-i-cinagusiyan  papongin 

a'ta.       Mldac     ;ij:i/u    mini'k    ka/a-'klwank    ka'i'cinagusiyan. 

Ambadac     kaba'kawmin."       Nanabucu    ajimadclyacagamat 
20  Ii8i/u  ki'tcigami. 


27.    NANABUSHU  COMFORTS  HTS  GRANDMOTHER. 

Ningutingsa  anipapimosat  cigwasa  udababandan  o'ku- 
misan  kapi'u-ntcikana'pan.  Kaga't  kayabi  kra-'tani  utcl- 
manini.  Kaga^tsa  minwantam  Nanabuc  tayoc  'ici/u  pima- 
disinit.  Anigu'plta'i'tag  madwamawiwan  :  "Nojis!"  madwa- 


203 

Again  he  spoke:  "Oh,  impossible,  Nanabushu!  Impossible 
really !  Perhaps,  indeed,  I  am  now  growing  unconscious." 

Nanabushu  then  went  up  close  and  stood  beside  him. 
"Oh,  do  hurry  and  impale  me  upon  (the  spit)!"  -While 
Nanabushu  looked  on,  then  down  to  the  ground  fell 
(Wlndigo)  with  his  bottom ;  thereupon  truly  was  he  dying. 
When  he  was  dead,  then  out  from  thence  came  the  Weasel 
running. 

"How  now,  my  little  brother!  Wonder  what  (I  can  do) 
so  that  he  may  be  very  thankful !  Therefore  then  will  I 
paint  him."  Nanabushu  took  him  up  (and)  then  washed 
him  in  water.  After  he  had  made  him  thoroughly  clean, 
what  should  he  do  but  seek  for  white  clay.  After  he 
had  found  it,  whiter  still  he  burned  the  white  clay.  After 
it  was  made  exceedingly  white,  then  he  had  it  finished, 
whereupon  all  over  he  painted  the  Weasel ;  at  the  end  of 
the  tail  he  painted  it  black.  uNow,  just  you  try  and  see 
how  you  run." 

To  be  sure,  the  Weasel  started  running.  Oh,  how  really 
proud  he  was!  Nanabushu  spoke  to  him,  saying:  "There 
fore  in  this  manner  do  I  render  thanks  to  you.  I  was 
dying  at  the  time,  Weasel.  And  that  is  the  way  you  shall 
look  only  in  the  winter-time.  And  as  long  as  the  world 
lasts,  this  is  the  way  you  shall  look.  Therefore  I  now 
take  leave  of  you."  Nanabushu  then  departed,  keeping 
along  the  shore  of  the  sea. 

27.  NANABUSHU  COMFORTS  HIS  GRANDMOTHER. 

Once,  while  travelling  along,  he  came  in  sight  of  where 
he  had  left  his  grandmother.  To  be  sure,  there  still  was 
her  canoe.  Truly  pleased  was  Nanabushu  that  she  was 
still  alive.  When  he  went  up  from  the  shore,  at  that 
moment  he  caught  the  sound  of  her  voice  crying:  "O 


204 

•rnatamowan.  Anida'pabit  Wwa  andansiwit,  kunigimn, 
kicingicinon,  ami'kwan  kigicinon.  Nanabucu  ajikanonat : 
"No'ko,  nintagwicin. " 

Ka^kwabatawanga/rganit    Ii8i/u    utami^kwanini   upra'pagi- 
5   toni.      "Cicl,   matci'a'nimog !      Ninglgagwanisaganimag  lgi/u 
matciwabicaclwicag  wlnanapagansumiwat." 

Ajikanonat  mlnawa:  "No'ko,  kaga't  kuca  nintagwicin." 
Nanabucu  oma  ani'i-jipmdigat ;  udani'u'di'tinan.  "No'ko, 
kaga't  kucagu  nintagwicin."  Wagunanlwinan  wawanigu 

10  udabi'totclnan,  a^pidcigu  wlnisiwan,  kaya  ima  usklcigunink 
mi'tawangowiwan.  Midac  ajisagisi'a't  Nanabucu  o'kumi- 
san,  agaming  ijiwinat.  "No'ko,  intawa  misawa  kabing- 
wacagitobinin."  Kaga^  wawmga  ugi'tcikunaya'a'n ;  aciki- 
slyabawanat,  a'pidcigu  upini'a'n.  Ka'pmi'a't  aji'ijat  iintat. 

15  Ka'kina  uckra'yiTn  ublsi'konan.  "No'ko,  mri/>u  iciklwata 
ima  antansiyang."  Mlsax  katagwicinuwat  andawat  ugano- 
nigon  o'kumisan  :  "Nocis,  kawln  win  nimpa'kadasi.  Maga- 
'kuckwamag  pajik  nanta  wabantcikan,  ml'i'ma11  tcimi'kaman 
wanicicing  wlsiniwin." 


20  Nanabucu  ugalkikipiton  lis;i/u  maga'kuckwamag.  A'tiwa, 
anin  ka*i*cinank  picicig  Ii5:i/u  pimita  kaya  wlyas !  "No'ko, 
kaga'tigu  klgaminowlsinimin."  Nanabucu  mlsana  iu  pitclnag 
minowlsinit. 


205 

my  dear  grandchild!"  was  the  sound  of  her  voice  crying. 
When  he  went  up  (and)  peeped  into  her  little  dwelling, 
lo,  there  she  lay,  by  a  spoon  she  lay.  Nanabushu  then 
addressed  her,  saying:  "O  my  grandmother!  I  am  come." 

Dipping  up  some  ashes  with  her  spoon,  she  threw 
them  toward  (the  speaker).  "Begone,  vile  creature!  I 
thoroughly  loathe  those  wicked  martins  that  wish  to 
sadden  me." 

Then  he  spoke  to  her  again,  saying :  u  My  grandmother, 
in  reality  have  I  come."  Nanabushu  at  that  moment  went 
on  in  ;  he  went  over  and  took  hold  of  her.  "My  grand 
mother,  in  reality  have  I  come."  At  last  he  put  his  arms 
tenderly  around  her  waist,  and  she  was  very  unclean,  and 
there  in  her  eyes  was  sand.  Thereupon  out  of  doors 
Nanabushu  took  his  grandmother,  to  the  shore  was  where 
he  took  her.  "My  grandmother,  therefore  entirely  of  all 
your  clothes  will  I  strip  you."  Really  of  every  single 
piece  of  clothing  he  stripped  her ;  then  by  washing  he 
made  her  clean,  and  very  clean  he  made  her.  After  he 
had  made  her  clean,  then  he  went  home.  With  clothes 
all  new  he  dressed  her.  "My  grandmother,  now  let  us 
return  to  the  little  place  where  we  dwell."  And  so  when 
they  were  come  at  their  home,  he  was  addressed  by  his 
grandmother,  saying:  "My  grandchild,  I  am  not  hungry 
myself.  In  one  of  the  birch-bark  boxes  do  you  search, 
for  there  will  you  find  some  food  that  is  nice." 

Nanabushu  ripped  open  the  birch-bark  box.  My!  what 
should  he  behold  but  a  vast  store  of  grease  and  meat! 
"My  grandmother,  in  truth,  shall  we  be  well  supplied  with 
food."  Nanabushu  then  for  the  first  time  in  a  long  while 
ate  a  hearty  meal. 


2C>6 


28.   NANABUSHU  SWALLOWED  BY  THE  STURGEON.  T 

Misa'  ajitibi'katinik ;  weyabaninig  ayabi  andansiwiwat. 
Aba'pic  nawa'kwanig  uganonan  o'kumisan  :  "No'ko,  kana- 
batc  ningacacigatab.  Kawlnina  wawabanaban  kitayasln?" 


"Nojis,   kaga't  nintaiyan." 

5  A'taya,  kaga't  minwantam  Nanabucu.  aNolko,  am- 
basa  niwlwawabanabl.  Intawa  iu  kitclman  ningayabatci'ton." 
Nanabucu  ajiposit  micawagam  aji'i'cat.  A'pidci  micawa- 
gam  ka'tagwicing,  anlc  kisttcigami,  "Mlsa7  oma  kadaci- 
gwagwaskwapitcigayan,"  i'kido.  Nanabucu  ubona'katdn 
10  4£i/u  umlgiskan  ;  kamica'klsanik  madcra'm  : 


"Micmamiigwa,  pinawil'kuntci'a'n  i'ku'kaya11. 
Micmamagwa,  pinawa'kuntci'a'n  i'ku'caya"." 

Midac  i'i'ma  na'i'tag  ayat  asa/u  miclnamagwa.     Mamwa- 

'tcidac  ima  unowangiganig  mlsa  ima  siniguskagut.    Kaga'pi 

1 5   ingutci  anu'i'ca,   mlsa7  untcita  48i/u  siniguskagut  'isi/n  migis- 

kan.      Kaga'pisa    oganonan  adi'kamagwan  :  2    "Adi'kamag, 

ambasano,   nawatantarna/u   Nanabucu  iwa  wawabanaban." 


Kaga't    acinawatatank    lifii/u    uwawabanabanini.       Ki'tci- 

wlckani  W11  owawabanaban.      Ajiwrkubidot,    "  'A'ta,  mlsa' 

20  mlsax,  mlsa7  waltiyan !"     Cigwa  omo'kibinan  adi'kamagwan. 

"Isa,3     kawin    kin    kinantawanimisinon !       Klwinantan 

wawabanaban. " 

1  For  other  versions  see  Nos.  7,  29,  61. 

2  Adi'kamagwan,   "white   fish;"   literally,   "caribou  fish." 


207 


28.  NANABUSHU  SWALLOWED  BY  THE  STURGEON.1 

And  then  night  came  on;  on  the  morrow  he  remained 
idle  at  their  little  home.  And  when  it  came  noon,  he 
spoke  to  his  grandmother,  saying :  u  My  grandmother,  per 
haps  I  shall  grow  weary  with  being  idle.  Have  you  not 
a  hook  and  line?" 

"My  grandchild,  to  be  sure,  I  have  one." 
Oh,  truly  pleased  was  Nanabushu.  "My  grandmother, 
therefore  do  I  wish  to  fish  with  hook  and  line.  Accordingly 
your  canoe  will  I  use."  When  Nanabushu  got  into  (the 
canoe),  then  out  to  sea  he  put.  When  very  far  out  on 
the  water  he  was  come,  for  it  was  the  sea,  "  Here  is  where 
I  will  fish  with  my  hook  and  line,"  he  said.  Nanabushu 
cast  his  hook  into  the  water ;  when  it  touched  the  floor 
(of  the  sea),  he  began  singing : 

"O  big  sturgeon !  come  swallow  me,  here  is  my  decoy. 
O  big  sturgeon!  come  swallow  me,  here  is  my  decoy." 

And  so  at  that  very  place  the  big  sturgeon  happened 
to  be.  And  it  was  there  that  he  felt  a  rubbing  on  the 
cheeks  (by  the  hook).  At  last  away  he  tried  in  vain  to 
go,  but  exactly  as  before  he  felt  the  rubbing  of  the  hook. 
Then  finally  he  spoke  to  the  Whitefish,2  saying:  "O  White- 
fish!  please  seize  that  bobbing  (hook)  of  Nanabushu's  with 
your  mouth." 

Truly  then  it  seized  that  bobbing  (hook)  with  its  mouth. 
There  was  a  hard  pull  on  the  bobbing  (hook).  When  he 
pulled  on  it,  "Ah,  that's  it,  that's  it,  that's  what  I  want!" 
Presently  he  drew  the  Whitefish  to  the  surface  of  the 
water.  "Bah!3  I  don't  want  you.  You  befoul  the  bobbing 
(hook)." 

3  Isa,  "Bah!"  an  exclamation  of  reproach  5  with  most  Ojibwa  dialects  it  is  uttered 
only  by  the  feminine  sex. 


208 

Kaga't  intawa  upagidandan  'ici/u  wawabanaban.  Intawa 
ajiklwat  adi'kamag.  Cigwa  anitagwicin.  Micinamagwan 
ajikakwatcimigut :  "Anintac  a'kitut?" 

"Ka,     ^Kiwmantan    iu    wawabanaban,'    i'kito    Nanabucu 
5   Miclnamagwa  ya'ta  ninantawanima." 

Misa  keyabi  onowangikanig  sinigwisanig  'i^Va  uwawa- 
banabanini.  A'pidcisa  umiguckatantan  miclnamagwa. 
"Tagfa,  kin,  namao^us,  awinawatantan." 

•o"  *          •          o  ... 

Tokisani     iu     wawabanaban.       Ajiwfkubitot     Nanabucu 
10  uwawabanaban,     mlsa7     nasao     a'kitut :     "Misa    wa'tiyan." 
Omo'kibanan    !ni/u    namagusan.      "Isa,    kawln   km  kinanta- 
wanimisinon  !      Kiwinantan   'ici/u  niwawabanaban." 

Minawa  ubagitantan  namagus.  Ajimadcat  -,  tagwicing 
uclogimaman  uganonigon.  "Amc  a'kitut?" 

15        "Kawln     kuca    km    kinantawanirnisinon.       Micinamagwa 
yata  ninantawanima." 

Misa  4/u  ingutci  aji'i'cat  miclnamagwa.  Kawasa  ugacki- 
'tosln  pa'kan  tciwawabanabinit.  u  Acimadcisawma-a^11  Na 
nabucu!  Mini'k  ningitacl'kag  wmickri't !"  Nanabucdwan 

20  unawatantamawan  isiwa  uwiiwabanabanini. 


Nanabucu     migu    iu    ajiki'tciwibitot    ifii/u    wawabanaban. 
Inabit     micawao;am,     minisans    inantam    wandcimo'kibinik. 

o 

Mlnangwana  iu  ucigwanani  !ni/u  miclnamagwan.  Cigwasa 
ningutingigu  panagu  kasaswanik  u'tawagan.  Minangwana 
25  iu  kogamigut  mlgu  iciu  kigitciman.  Mlsagu  a'pan  aciwan- 
antank ;  wllkasa  mi'kawi.  Ma'kawit,  "  Waginuganing  nin- 
taiya,"  inantam.  Inabit,  icpiming  ki'tcimaskimut  agotanik  ; 


2OQ 

Truly,  therefore,  (the  Whitefish)  let  go  from  his  mouth 
the  bobbing  (hook).  And  so  back  home  went  the  White- 
fish.  Soon  he  came  home.  By  the  big  Sturgeon  was  he 
asked:  "And  what  did  he  say?" 

"Oh,  'you  befoul  the  bobbing  (hook),'  said  Nanabushu. 
llt  is  the  big  Sturgeon  I  want.'" 

o  o 

And  so  once  more  against  his  cheeks  rubbed  the  bob 
bing  (hook).  Very  much  was  the  big  Sturgeon  annoyed  : 
"I  say,  you,  Trout,  go  seize  it  with  your  mouth." 

There  was  a  gentle  pull  on  the  bobbing  (hook).  As 
on  his  bobbing  (hook)  Nanabushu  pulled,  so  the  same 
thing  as  before  he  said:  "This  is  what  I  want."  Out  of 
the  water  he  pulled  the  Trout.  "  Bah !  you  are  not  the 
one  I  want.  You  befoul  my  bobbing  (hook)." 

The  Trout  was  the  next  to  let  go  from  his  mouth  the 
bobbing  (hook).  Then  he  departed ;  when  he  got  home, 
by  his  chief  was  he  asked:  "What  did  he  say?" 

"You  are  not  the  one  I  really  want.  It  is  only  the 
big  Sturgeon  I  wish." 

Thereupon  away  went  the  big  Sturgeon.  He  found  it 
impossible  to  make  (Nanabushu)  fish  elsewhere  with  his 
hook  and  line.  "Confound  that  Nanabushu!  He  has  been 
pestering  me  so  long  as  to  anger  me!"  He  then  seized 
hold  of  Nanabushu's  bobbing  (hook)  with  his  mouth. 

Nanabushu  thereupon  held  tight  to  the  bobbing  (hook). 
As  he  looked  out  over  the  broad  sea,  an  island  he  thought 
was  appearing  on  the  surface  of  the  water.  But  it  hap 
pened  to  be  the  tail  of  the  big  Sturgeon.  Then  of  a  sudden 
there  was  a  continuous  ringing  in  his  ears.  It  happened 
that  he  was  being  taken  down  into  the  water  together 
with  his  canoe.  And  so  straightway  he  lost  his  wits; 
after  a  long  while  he  came  to.  When  he  was  revived, 
"In  a  circular  place  am  I,"  he  thought.  While  looking 
around,  up  overhead  a  huge  bag  was  hanging ;  it  hap- 

14 — PUBL.    AMER.    ETHN.    SOC.    VOL.    VII. 


2  IO 


mimigu  iu  acimamasi'kanik.  Mlnawa  iwiti  inabit  wa'kwayal 
awiya  owabaman  tacika'kawatabinit.  Acipasigwlt  Nana 
bucu;  aciwanabi'tawat,  ajikanonat :  "A'tawa  niclmisa, 
anlndac  acra*yayan  ?" 


5        Agawagu    pimadisiwan.      Cigwa    kigitowan :    "Nanabucu, 
mlsa  kaya  km  kf  kuni'k  asa/u  micinamagwa." 

"Aba'pinisiwagan !"     inantam     Nanabucu.      "Ambasano, 
wlndamawicin  anti  ka'taciguni'k." 

"Kawlnmac;     iwiti     nawaya'kwucink    cingwa'k    mri'witi 

10  ayawat  igi/u  wacackwatowag ; 1  midac  iwiti  anantawayamban ; 

piniwapamagwa  Igi/u  wacackwatowag,   nibl'kangidac  pangi- 

cinog  Igi/u  ucackwatowag ;  mldac  48i/u  natagwana-o'nagitwa 

midac    ima    klnawatamit    micinamagwa.       Nanabucu,    am- 

basa7,  kigawlndamon.     Mlginini  iu  odac  kayagotanig.     Am- 

15   basano,  kicpin  ayawanan   'i8i/u  mo'koman, 


Nanabucu    dac    udaiyan  iu  mo'kuman.      Wagunamwinan 
pang!  ajitca'ka'a'mawat. 

Madwagigitowan    micinamagwan :    "Kaga't  nisasagita'a'." 

Nawatcidac  anigu'k  ubaciba'a-mawan  Ii8i/u  uda*i-ni. 
20        Mlnawa     madwa^io-itowan :     "Ka^a't    nimani4kag    'a^a/u 

•  O    <^>  •  c>  c> 

Nanabucu  krkunag."  Madwakanonimawan :  "Kawasa, 
kldawlskiwigusl  wasa/u  Nanabucu.  Kaga't  matcri'ciwabisi 
Nanabucu." 


Wagunamwinan   ajibabacipa-a-mawat  lisi/u  uda'i'ni. 


Wacackwatowag,    "cones;"    it    is  also  the   name  of  the  leathery  hard  shell-like 


2  I  I 

pened  to  be  in  motion.  Again  while  looking  yonder  at 
the  other  end  he  saw  some  sort  of  a  creature  seated, 
swinging  back  and  forth.  Then  up  rose  Nanabushu  to 
his  feet ;  taking  his  seat  beside  him,  he  then  addressed 
him,  saying:  "My  poor  little  brother,  and  what  is  the 
matter  with  you  ?" 

And  barely  alive  was  the  other.  Presently  he  said : 
"Nanabushu,  and  so  you  too  have  been  swallowed  by  the 
Big  Sturgeon." 

"(That  is)  dreadful!"  thought  Nanabushu.  "Please  tell 
me  where  it  was  you  were  swallowed." 

"Oh,  it  was  over  yonder;  where  a  pine  hangs  out  over 
the  water  is  a  place  where  there  are  some  cones ;  l  it  was 
there  I  climbed,  searching  for  them ;  I  bit  off  the  cones, 
letting  them  fall,  and  into  the  water  they  dropped ;  and 
so  when  we  were  hauling  them  ashore  by  canoe  was  the 
time  that  the  Big  Sturgeon  seized  me  with  his  mouth. 
Nanabushu,  come,  I  will  give  you  some  information. 
Behold,  that  is  his  heart  which  hangs  from  up  there ! 
Please,  if  you  have  a  knife,  do  pierce  it." 

Now,  Nanabushu  possessed  a  knife.  And  so  what  did 
he  do  but  give  the  heart  a  gentle  prick. 

Then  was  heard  the  voice  of  the  Big  Sturgeon  saying : 
"Really,  I  am  afraid  in  my  heart." 

So  harder  still  (Nanabushu)  pierced  his  heart. 

Again  was  heard  the  voice  of  him,  saying:  "Truly  in 
discomfort  am  I  for  having  swallowed  Nanabushu."  Then 
was  heard  the  voice  of  some  one  addressing  him:  "Why, 
you  would  not  be  free  of  harm  from  Nanabushu.  Truly 
a  baneful  being  is  Nanabushu." 

What  should  he  do  but  stab  away  upon  the  (Big  Stur 
geon's)  heart. 

fungi  found  on  various  trees,  the  poplar  in  particular;  it  may  be  that  is  what  is 
meant  here. 


2  12 

Anigu'k  madwagigitdwas :  "As,  misa'pana  kinibut  kito- 
gimaminan  !  Amc  kagitotawank  ?  Madclnacina  takackra' 
tcipimadisit.  Intawasagu  manu  mri'*11  ka/rcraryaguntcing." 

Kumagu  ya'pi  aji'a'boskantcisat. 

5  Anlc  ml  cigwa  krki'kanimat  Nanabucu  kra'bockantci- 
sanit,  ajiganonat  wadabimadcin.  Anlc  adcitamon  Ini/u 
wadabimat,  miwanini11  kaya  win  kalkunigogubanan  lni/u 
micinamagwan  'aca/u  adcitamo.  Mldac  alp!  ajikigitut 
Nanabucu:  uAmbasano  rrma  no'kumis  utagamlming 

10  tawri-ci'a'gwaiya'a-gu  wasa/u  micmamagwa ;  ningaki'tcimin- 
wantam." 

Mlsa7  gaga't  na'i'tag  4eima  aci'a-gwaiya'a'gunlt.  Nin- 
gutingigu  alpidci  mamatcisawag.  "  Mlmawlni  iu  klmicaga- 
maya'u'gut,"  udinan  lni/u  adcitamon.  "Taga,  mri/0U  ka'i'ci- 

15  bagutcinag."  Anlc  anawigu  kinwabi'katini  i'i'wa  omo'ku- 
man.  Nanabucu  ajimadicwat,  ki'tciwl'ka  ubagunacwan. 
Aba'pic  bagunacwat  oganonan  adcitamon:  u'Alau,  adci 
tamo,  saga'a'n." 


Kagalt  ajisaga-a'nk  lasa/u  adcitamo,  kaya  win  Nanabucu 

20  ajisaga'arnk.       Kasaga'a'nk,     utciman     usagisi'ton.       Mlsa 

cigwa  anici'kupit,   ajiplndigawat  o'kumisan.      A'pl  ka4plndi- 

gawat  ini/u  o'kumisan,  ajikanonat:  "No'ko,  mlsax  iu  klnisag 

laea/u  miclnamagwa.      Ambasagu  awimadcinama'kan." 


"Nojic,    kawin    kanabatc  kitanisasl  laea/u  micinamagwa." 

25        "Kawin  kuca  anica  klwri'nisinon.      Naska  kuca  naziblta, 
mri'ma  tciwabamat." 


213 

Loud  sounded  the  voices  of  them,  saying:  "Yea,  gone 
is  our  chief  now  dead  !  What  can  we  do  for  him  ?  It  is 
difficult  to  be  able  to  bring  him  back  to  life.  So  there 
fore  he  may  just  as  well  be  left  to  drift  upon  the  water." 

It  was  some  time  before  (the  Big  Sturgeon)  came  up 
to  the  surface  of  the  water. 

Well,  now,  when  Nanabushu  learned  that  (the  Sturgeon) 
was  come  up  to  the  surface  of  the  water,  then  he  spoke 
to  the  one  by  whom  he  sat.  Now,  it  was  the  Squirrel 
by  whom  he  sat,  for  it  was  the  Squirrel  that  had  been 
swallowed  too  by  the  Big  Sturgeon.  And  so  then  Nana 
bushu  said:  "Pray,  yonder  to  my  grandmother's  landing- 
place  let  the  Big  Sturgeon  drift;  I  shall  be  greatly  pleased." 

And  so  truly  that  was  precisely  the  place  where  it 
drifted  ashore.  And  by  and  by  they  were  much  shaken 
up.  "It  is  possible  that  he  has  drifted  ashore,"  he  said 
to  the  Squirrel.  "Now,  therefore,  will  I  open  him  at  the 
belly."  Of  course  rather  long  was  that  knife  of  his. 
When  Nanabushu  was  cutting  him  with  the  knife,  he  was 
a  long  time  cutting  a  hole  through  the  body.  By  the 
time  he  had  made  a  hole  through  him  with  a  knife,  he 
addressed  the  Squirrel,  saying:  "Now,  Squirrel,  do  you 
go  outside." 

To  be  sure,  then  out  went  the  Squirrel,  and  Nanabushu 
too  went  outside.  When  he  had  gone  out,  he  then  took 
out  his  canoe.  And  so  when  on  up  from  the  shore  he 
went,  he  entered  into  where  his  grandmother  was.  After 
he  had  gone  into  where  his  grandmother  was,  he  then 
spoke  to  her :  "  My  grandmother,  now  have  I  slain  the 
Big  Sturgeon.  So  please  do  you  go  dress  the  Sturgeon." 

"My    grandson,    you    could    not    possibly    slay    the    Big, 
Sturgeon." 

"Why,  not  a  whit  am  I  deceiving  you.  Just  let  us  go 
down  to  the  water,  and  there  shall  you  see  him." 


2I4 

Kaga/t     'asa/u     mindimoya     ajinaziblt,     actaiya,    ki'tcigi- 
gonyan. 

"No'ko,   misa  wa8a/u  kanama/kanat." 

"Mri/>u,   nojis  ka/rcinama/kanag." 

29.   NANABUSHU,  THE  SWEET-BRIER  BERRIES,  AND  THE 

STURGEONS.1 

5  Weyabaninik  ajimadcat  Nanabucu,  saga-i'ganmg  ododisa 
4ci/u  anicinaba8 ;  kuniginln,  ininiwan  kaya  wlwini ;  nlciwa8 
kwlwisansa8,  umdcanisini.  Pajikidac  pa'kan  i'kwawan  nin- 
gutci  ima  tawan,  a'pidcisa  usagri'gon  Ini/u  ininiwan. 
"Kaga'tsa,  Nanabucu,  ambasa,  wlwin  ima  au  i'kwa." 

10        "Niclmisa,  kawasa  ninta'i'cictcigasl.      Kawm  po'tc  kaba- 
yaT   nintawlwislnan  klcpin  wlwiyan." 

"Nanabucu,   manogu,   tabwa'tawicin." 
"  'Au,    misa    iu    tabwa'tonan."      Misax    kaga't    widigamat 
lni/u  ilkwawan. 


1 5  Amc,  mri/>u  cigwa  anitagwagininig ;  kayadac  papa'kan 
tawag,  anlc  mamawadisitiwag  Ini/u  ininiwan.  "Misa  cigwa 
tcimadci'taiyank  'i8iwa  tcinotciglngon'i'wayank."  Anlc  kaga't 
ajinotcigingon:i'wawat,  adi'kamagwa8  ki'tcinlbiwa  unisawa8. 
Anlc  adcidagona'ku'kawag.  A'pidcisa  nlbiwa  unisawa8. 

20  Ningutingigu  acikackatininig  Wma  andaciklngon'i*kawat ; 
misa'pan  kikackatininig  'isi/u  saga'i'gan.  Abapic  kakacka- 
tininig,  " Ambasano,"  i'kito  Nanabucu:  "intawana  klni'ta- 
mawa  kiga*a'mwananig  Igiwa  kldatcitagotakaniminanig." 


215 

Sure  enough,  when  the  old  woman  went  down  to  the 
water,  why,  (there  was)  a  great  fish. 

"My  grandmother,  this  is  the  sturgeon  which  you  are 
to  dress." 

"Very  well,  my  grandson,  then  will  I  dress  the  sturgeon." 

29.  NANABUSHU,  THE  SWEET-BRIER  BERRIES,  AND  THE 
STURGEONS.1 

When  the  morrow  came,  then  off  started  Nanabushu ;  at 
a  lake  he  came  upon  some  people ;  lo,  there  was  a  man 
and  his  wife;  there  were  two  boys,  their  children.  And 
there  was  one  other  woman  who  lived  in  another  place, 
very  much  was  she  loved  by  the  man.  "To  be  sure, 
Nanabushu,  come,  do  you  take  to  wife  the  woman  yonder." 

"My  little  brother,  I  could  not  possibly  do  it.  Not 
even  for  a  brief  period  of  time  could  I  have  her  for  a 
wife  if  I  should  marry  her." 

"Nanabushu,   never  you   mind,  but  do  as  I  tell  you." 

"Very  well,  then  will  I  do  as  you  say."  Thereupon 
truly  he  married  the  woman. 

Well,  it  was  now  getting  well  on  into  the  autumn ;  and 
(Nanabushu  and  his  wife)  lived  apart  from  (the  other 
family),  but  they  visited  back  and  forth  with  the  man.  "It 
is  now  time  for  us  to  set  to  work  getting  fish."  Now,  to 
be  sure,  when  they  went  to  get  fish,  whitefish  in  great 
plenty  they  killed.  Now  they  made  a  rack  to  hang  them 
with  head  down.  Ever  so  many  they  killed.  And  once 
the  place  froze  up  where  they  were  fishing;  accordingly 
all  frozen  up  was  the  lake.  Seeing  that  it  was  frozen, 
"Come,"  said  Nanabushu;  "on  that  account  let  us  first 
eat  up  those  (fishes)  of  yours  which  we  have  hung  up 
with  head  down." 

1  For  other  versions  see  Nos.  7  (p.  49),  28  (p.  207),  61   (p.  467). 


2l6 

Anlc,    mlgu    iu    gaga't   acictcigawat.      Kumagu  a'pitcibi- 

boninig    ajigitamawat,    mldac    alta    wlnawa   ug!ngon*i'miwa. 

Cigwasa    madca    Ia8a/u    Inini ;    anitagwicing  wanagucininig ; 

a'tawa,     kuniginln     ka'u'ndcikusinigwan.       Mldac     awinini 

S   acio^anonat  Ini/u  wlwan  :   "Mlmawini  iu  kanabatc  tcikitcinon- 

«J  o  •  •  •  • 

tayabaniciyang.  Intawasa  mlnotc  ningaklyusa."  Anlc 
kaga't  ajiklyusat,  kawinsa  kago  uni'tosln.  Kaga't  sana- 
gatini ;  wl'ka'ku  pajik  pinawan  uplnan.  Kaga'plgu  pa'ka- 
dawag.  Ningutingigu  kawm  kanaga  oplnasln  Ini/u  pinawan. 
10  Misa7  gaga't  ajipa'kadawat.  Intawadac  ugini8  unantuna- 
wawan.  Mlsana  48i/u  ugini8  ajiamwawat,  wankitci  cigu 
kawanantamog. 


Ningutingidac  minawa  ajimadcat  papanandawlginiwat 
a'pidcigu  kisinani  kayadacigu  grkatci.  Saga'i'ganing  aji- 

15  madablt.  Mldac  ima  anasama'tawaninig  anrijat  a'pidcigu 
umi'kawa8  lisi/u  ugini9.  Amc  papagiwayanackimutacing 
udaniblnawan8.  Ningutingigu  anipimacagamat,  pamagu  kago 
nwantank  madwasininig  ima  mi'kwamlng.  Aji'i'nabit  kago 
k'ra'tani.  Wagunamwinan  nimina'ku  nanzi;kank ;  payacwa- 

20  bandank,  kuniginln  pikwa'k  ma'ku'tawagan  asawawink ! 
Aji'O'doda'pinank  wlwawanbandank,  pamagu  awiya  wand- 
cikanonigut :  "Tawa't,  tawa't !  Klnina  klpi'kwa'k  wata'pi- 
naman  ?" 


Ajikanonat:  "Kawm,  anicagu  niwlwabandan."   Papa'kiwis 
25   ajikanonigut :    "Kigi'katc  mawln." 


Well,  that  was  what  they  truly  did.  And  later  in  the 
winter  when  they  ate  them  all  up,  there  still  remained 
the  fish  (of  Nanabushu  and  his  wife).  Then  off  went  the 
man ;  he  arrived  at  where  he  went l  in  the  evening ;  alas ! 
he  found  that  they  must  have  moved  camp.  Thereupon 
the  man  spoke  to  his  wife,  saying:  "There  is  a  doubtful 
chance  if  we  shall  be  able  to  live  through  the  winter. 
Therefore  on  that  account  I  will  hunt  for  game."  So 
truly  off  on  a  hunt  he  went,  but  he  could  not  kill  anything. 
To  be  sure,  it  was  a  trying  time ;  once  in  a  long  while 
he  fetched  home  only  a  single  ruffed  grouse.  And  at  last 
they  were  in  want  of  food.  Then  by  and  by  not  even 
a  single  ruffed  grouse  did  he  bring  home.  Thereupon 
they  were  truly  hungry.  So  on  that  account  for  sweet- 
brier  berries  they  went  to  seek.  Although  they  had  sweet- 
brier  berries  to  eat,  yet  by  degrees  were  they  starving. 

And  another  time  when  he  set  out  to  seek  for  sweet- 
brier  berries,  the  weather  was  very  cold  and  he  was 
shivering.  Out  upon  a  lake  he  came.  And  so  when  he 
went  along  yonder  sunny  side,  in  abundance  he  found  the 
sweet-brier  berries.  Now,  into  a  miserable  cloth  bag  he 
put  them.  And  by  and  by,  while  going  along  the  shore, 
he  suddenly  heard  the  sound  of  something  fall  yonder  on 
the  ice.  When  he  looked,  something  was  there.  There 
upon  he  went  out  upon  the  ice,  going  up  to  where  it 
was ;  when  he  got  a  near  view  of  it,  lo,  (it  was)  an  arrow 
feathered  with  the  ear  of  a  bear!  As  he  started  to  pick 
(the  arrow)  up  to  examine  it,  all  at  once  by  some  one 
there  was  he  addressed:  "Hold,  hold!  Is  the  arrow  yours 
that  you  are  picking  up?" 

Then  he  spoke  to  the  being:  "No,  I  only  wanted  to 
look  at  it."  Pilferer  then  was  addressed:  "You  are  cold, 
no  doubt?" 

1  At  the  place  where  he  and  Nanabushu  had  been  in  camp  together. 


218 

"Kaga't  ningfkatc." 

"Taga,  kabotawanin,  intigu  kigfkatc."     Kaga't  nadaga- 

'kowan     podawawan.       Kaki'tcibotawanit,     aTta    ickutang 

cingobln  uda'paginani ;   kaya  dac  gagltciwan   madwaglgito- 

5   wan:  "Ba'kiwis,  kawmina  kitamldcisman  !ni/u  nintaciganan?" 


"  'Au,  ningamidcinan."  Opi'a'cawagamawapina  magon. 
Ajiwabandank,  kunigimn,  kaskami'kwanowan  !  Anic  a'pidci 
pa'kada,  mldac  lisi/u  acimldcit.  Udanuwri'ckwantanan. 
"Kagu7!"  udigon ;  "manogu  ga'kina  mldcin." 


10        Ml     cigwa    kici'tanit,    kimackwatciplta'kisinanit.      Cigwa 
pasigwlwan,    "Pa'kiwis,  wagunan   'ici/u  kapinondaman  ?" 


"Ka,    uginig.      Kagatusagu    nimpa'kadamin.     Mlna  igi/u 
waam  wangitwa. " 

Kuniginm,    upimi-u'ta'pinamini    48i/u  umackimut,  pltawai- 

1 5   yaT    ka^anmaminit ;    acislgwabinanit,    a'pana    tcatcatclpan 

acipangicininit     udoginlma8.       "A'tawa,     ugri'niga'a'8    lici/u 

unldcanisa6 !"    inantam.       Aninimina'kowan    anita'kunaminit 

lisi/u  umackimut  5  klmadwasigwa'i'gawan. 


Kunigimn,  inabit,  kanawabamat  udacimockina'a'ni  'i^ma 

20  umackimutang     mi/u    mi'kwamln.       Uganonigon    Pa'kiwis  •, 

amba,  nimina'ku  Pa'kiwis.      "Ambasa",  wlpisintawicin  wa'i'- 

ninan,   mlgu  gaga't  rru  tcipa'kadayan  klcpin  nondawisiwan 

ka'i'ninan.   Pa'kiwis,  ambasano!  ompiwanan  wacau  mi'kwan. 

Owiti     dac     waga'kwagamiwank     mri'witi     ka'a-ba'toyan ; 

25   o'O'magu     tcinimina'kuyan,     mri'ma    awiya    kiganontawag 

tcibibagimi'kwa :  'A'a'e1,  Pa'kiwis !   Kungwa-u-'k!   Wagunac 


2I9 

"Indeed,   I   am  cold." 

"Well,  I  will  build  you  a  fire,  for  it  seems  that  you 
are  cold."  Truly,  then  on  the  ice  went  the  other  towards 
the  shore  to  build  the  fire.  When  he  had  a  great  fire 
going,  then  right  into  it  he  flung  some  balsams ;  and  as 
he  was  taking  off  his  moccasins,  he  was  heard  to  say : 
"  Pilferer,  would  you  not  eat  those  stockings  of  mine  ?" 

"Very  well,  I  will  eat  them."  He  had  them  flung  over 
to  him  from  across  the  fire.  As  he  looked  at  them,  lo, 
there  was  the  dried  tail  of  a  beaver !  Naturally  he  was 
exceedingly  hungry,  and  therefore  he  ate  (it).  He  tried 
in  vain  not  to  eat  it  all  up.  "Don't!"  he  was  told;  "you 
must  eat  it  all." 

Now,  when  he  was  ready,  he  put  on  the  moccasins  of 
the  other.  When  he  rose  to  his  feet,  "Pilferer,  what  is 
that  you  are  carrying  on  your  back?" 

"Oh,  sweet-brier  berries.  Really  we  are  in  want  of  food. 
Those  are  what  we  are  going  to  eat." 

Lo,  the  other  went  over  and  took  up  his  bag ;  on  the 
inside  between  two  layers  he  got  hold  of  it ;  when  out 
he  poured  them,  forthwith  in  every  direction  fell  his  sweet- 
brier  berries.  "Oh,  how  ill  he  treats  his  children!"  he 
thought.  Then  out  on  the  ice  went  the  other,  carrying 
in  his  hand  the  bag  as  he  went;  then  was  heard  the 
sound  of  him  (chopping  on  the  ice). 

Lo,  as  he  looked,  he  observed  him  filling  up  his  bag 
with  the  ice.  By  him  was  the  Pilferer  addressed ;  accord 
ingly  out  on  the  ice  came  the  Pilferer.  "Hark!  do  you 
listen  to  what  I  intend  to  tell  you,  for  surely  you  will  go 
hungry  if  you  do  not  heed  what  I  tell  you.  Pilferer, 
listen  !  do  you  put  upon  your  back  this  pack  of  ice.  And 
over  toward  this  other  end  of  the  lake  is  the  way  by 
which  you  are  to  run;  for  as  you  go  by  this  place  on 
the  ice,  then  will  you  hear  them  yelling  at  you:  'Halloo, 


22O 

pamondank?'  Iwiti  dac  anigu'plyan  mrr  a'pl  kabonrr'kwa. 
Kawm  klgawabamaslg  !gi/u  kabiminri*ca'irlkwa.  TclgayaT 
dac  andayag  tcikistciwanatinag,  mrrwa  kanantawabanda- 
man.  A'pldac  wabandaman,  mri'ma  ka'i'cinlsatciwayan. 
5  Ugida'kidac  krrcaiyan,  mri'ma  ka'i-cipagitciwaba'kamat. 
Kagu7  win  plyabanabi'kan.  Gikicapidac  ml'i'u  tciplcayag 
;a8a/u  kimindimoimlc.  Aiyangwamisin,  kagu7  win  bablni'ta- 
wici'kan.  'A'au,  m!'i'u  cigwa  tcimadciba'toyan." 


Nimina'kuba'to  Ba'kiwis.  Ajikaski'tot  anigu'k  madclba'to. 
10  A'taiya,    tcibagamanimatini.      Awiya    onontawa9    pipaginit  : 
"  A'a'e1,  Ba'kiwis  pimiba*rwa  !    ' A'a/u,  kungwa'u'k  !"    Panagu 
kabitclnguskwanik.      "U8,   u8,   u8,  kungwa8  wata !" 


A'taiya !  mldac  kaga't  madciba'rwat.  "Intigwa  cigwagu 
ningagungwa-u-gu,"  anantank.  Cigwa  ubacwabantan  ciei/u 

15  a'ki.  A'pl  ta'ku'katang  alki,  awaniban  awiya ;  ml-i/>u 
krponi'i'gut.  Anibabimusat,  udani'a'ntawabandan  48i/u  tcl- 
wanatinanik.  Cigwa  gaga't  owabandan ;  anri  jinlsatciwat. 
Tagwucing  ugida'ki,  ajibagitciwaba'kamat  Ini/u  umi'kwarnl- 
man.  Kawln  kanaga  a'kawa  abanabisl.  Aniciklwat. 

20  Ta.£wicinof  antawat,   altawa  wlwan   namadabiwan  kaya  48i/u 

oo  .....y 

unltcanisa8.  A'pidcisa  pa'kadawa8.  Uganonigon  wlwan : 
"Anma?  Intigwadaci'ko  ubmabamn  ugimn,  kitinanimini- 
naban." 


22  I 


(there  is  the)  Pilferer !  Give  him  a  push !  What  is  he 
carrying  on  his  back?'  And  when  you  go  up  from 
yonder  shore,  then  will  you  be  left  alone  by  them.  You 
will  not  see  them  who  are  to  pursue  after  you.  And 
nigh  the  place  where  you  live  is  a  great  depression  in 
the  ground,  so  for  that  you  are  to  seek.  And  when 
you  see  it,  then  from  there  shall  you  descend  the  slope. 
And  when  to  the  summit  (again)  you  get,  then  there  shall 
you  put  down  your  pack.  Look  not  behind  you.  Then 
in  the  morning  hither  shall  come  you  and  your  old 
woman.  Do  you  be  careful,  pay  heed  to  what  I  have 
told  you.  Now,  then,  it  is  time  that  you  were  off  on 
the  run.7' 

Over  the  ice  went  the  Pilferer  running.  With  all  the 
speed  he  was  able  he  started  running.  Ah,  what  a  gale 
there  was  behind  (him) !  Somebody  he  heard  calling  aloud : 
"Halloo,  the  Pilferer  is  fleeing  by!  Come  on,  give  him 
a  push !"  And  forthwith  rose  the  din  of  ice  cracking. 
"Hu,  hu,  hu,  hu,  let  us  give  him  a  push!" 

Ah!  thereupon  he  truly  started  fleeing.  "It  seems  as 
if  I  shall  now  be  given  a  push,"  he  thought.  Presently 
he  was  in  close  view  of  the  land.  When  he  stepped 
upon  land,  gone  were  the  beings ;  accordingly  he  was  left 
alone.  As  on  his  way  he  walked,  he  kept  looking  for 
the  place  where  there  was  a  great  depression.  In  a  while, 
sure  enough,  he  saw  it ;  then  on  down  the  slope  he  went. 
When  he  came  on  the  (other)  summit,  he  put  down  his 
pack  of  ice.  Not  a  moment  did  he  wait  to  look  back. 
Then  on  his  homeward  way  he  went.  When  he  was 
come  at  home,  there  sat  his  poor  wife  and  those  children 
of  his.  Very  much  were  they  in  want  of  food.  He  was 
addressed  by  his  wife  saying :  "  How  is  it  ?  It  seemed 
that  it  was  his  wont  to  bring  home  sweet-brier  berries,  in 
such  manner  have  I  been  thinking  of  you." 


222 

Ajikanonatwlwan :  "Kagu'  ningutino  inantagan,  ganabatc 
manido  nindanucawanimik." 

Mlsa7    pmic    ka/rcikawicimowat.      Kawm    kago   umldcisl- 
nawa8.    Magwagu  tibi'kadinik  unicka  Pa'kiwis.    Ajikanonat 
5   wlwan  :    "  Mindimoya,   unickan." 

Gaga't  mindimoya  unicika. 

"BabP'tcIn  taga,   madcata,   pacur  ima  kiga'i'camin." 

Mlsagu  cigwa  animadcawad.  Caylgwa  udababandanawa 
ima  kistciwanatinanik.  Anisagatciwawat,  a'tawa,  anm 

10  ka'i'cinank  Pa;kiwis !  A'pidci  mockinablni  48i/u  kistciwa- 
natinan.  A'tiwa,  panagu  namawa8  kasagicigwananinit. 
"Naskaginln,  mindimoya11!  'A'a'11,  agwawabinatanik." 
Kumagu  mini'k  udagwawabinawa8.  "  'A'a11,  mindimoya, 
kaya  kin  mini'k  kakaskomatwa  pimiwanan."  Aco'O'ciwa- 

1 5  ni'kanawat,  cigwadac  ajiklwawat  ajiplndigawanawat  andawat. 
Kaga't  motcigisiwa8  'i8i/u  unitcanisiwa.  Mlsa  cigwa  ajitci- 
ba'kwawat.  Ka*ipckwawlsiniwat,  "  'A'a711,  ambadac  kagat 
awiagwawabinatanig. " 


Midac    kaga't    ajimadcawad.      Cigwasa   umadci'kawawa. 

20  Anawi  guca,  ki'tcinibiwa  udagwacimawa8.  Kawm  kanaga 
ubacinanasiwawa,  kabaglcig  udawanawa,  i-i'ma  antawat 
inawanawat.  Misa  cigwa  agwawana'kukawat.  Anicawa- 
wag  anint  agwatcing  udagonawa8.  Aba'pic  ka'klcl'tawat, 
amc  mrV'u  cigwa7  Nanabucu  kl'kitamwat  'i8i/u  uglngon'i*ma8. 

25    Wagunanlwinan    acimawaticiwat    lasa/u    Nanabucu.       Anln 


223 

Then  he  spoke  to  his  wife,  saying:  "Take  no  thought 
whatever  of  that,  for  maybe  by  a  manitou  am  I  really 
to  be  blessed." 

And  so  time  passed  on  till  they  lay  them  down  to  sleep. 
Nothing  had  they  to  eat.  And  while  it  was  yet  dark,  up 
from  bed  rose  the  Pilferer.  Then  he  spoke  to  his  wife, 
saying:  "Old  woman,  do  you  rise  up  from  bed." 

To  be  sure,  the  old  woman  rose  up  from  bed. 

"Put  on  your  moccasins  now,  let  us  be  going,  a  short 
way  over  there  will  we  go." 

And  so  then  away  they  started  on  their  journey.  In 
time  they  came  within  sight  of  the  place  of  the  great 
basin.  When  they  came  out  upon  the  summit,  why,  what 
was  the  Pilferer  to  behold !  Very  full  of  water  was  the 
great  basin.  Why,  nothing  could  be  seen  but  the  tails 
of  sturgeons  sticking  out.  "Just  look,  old  woman  !  Come, 
now,  let  us  fling  them  out !"  So  a  certain  number  of  them 
they  flung  out.  "Now,  then,  old  woman,  as  many  as  you 
can  carry  do  you  make  up  into  a  pack."  When  they 
made  up  their  packs,  then  they  returned,  carrying  their 
burdens  into  where  they  lived.  To  be  sure,  pleased  were 
their  children.  And  so  then  they  cooked  some  food. 
When  they  had  eaten,  "Now,  then,  therefore  let  us  in 
good  earnest  go  fling  them  out  of  the  water." 

Thereupon  truly  they  departed.  Presently  they  were 
at  work  on  them.  Oh,  but  a  vast  number  of  them  they 
drew  out  of  the  water !  By  no  means  did  they  get  any 
where  all  of  them,  all  day  long  were  they  hauling  them, 
over  to  where  they  lived  they  hauled  them.  Thereupon 
they  then  set  to  work  making  a  rack  (to  hang  the  fishes 
on).  They  removed  the  scales  from  some  (which)  they 
hung  up  out  of  doors.  By  the  time  they  were  done  with 
their  work,  then  it  was  that  Nanabushu  had  eaten  up  all 
his  own  fish.  What  should  Nanabushu  do  but  go  for  a 


224 

ka-rcinank  aniplndigat !  Nanabucu  ajiklgitut :  "A-a-a-e1, 
mldcisasf  kisl !  Kawininac  wlni  iu  kigiga'tasi.  Antidac  o*o' 
ka-u'ntcinanatwa  ogou  namawag?" 

"Migu  iu,   nldcisazfkisl,   rrma  nintota'rbaninang  mrrma 
5   ka'irndcinanangwa  Igi/u  namawag." 

"Ambasa,    ki'kino'a'mawicin    anln    ajictcigayan    lisi/u    ni- 


satwa." 


"Ka,  pisanisagu  ki'pimina'kwa  laca/u  nimindimo'i'mic. 
Mldac  'i8i/u  ka'klci'tod  plmina'kwan,  mldac  lisi/u  nm  ni'tam 

10  ka-ijimadci'taiyan  ki'trci'a-g  Ia8a/u  wa-u'mi'tciglyan.  Mldac 
48i/u  ka'klci'a'g  nindonda'i'baninang  ml'i'wa  nawatc  ningl- 
mistcalton  4ei/u  nindonda'i'baninan.  Mldac  ima  mamwa'tci- 
dac  kigicap  kigi'tcibotawa  Ia8a/u  nimindimoyayim.  Ka/i'ci- 
ta'kubicit  lisi/u  plmina'kwan  ;  katakkubicit,  ka'i'ciba'kublyan. 

15  Kumagu  alpl  anitagwicinan  nama  niwabama.  Acipacipawak, 
acito'to'kabigibitoyan  Ii8i/u  pimina'kwan  •  acikitcitabacit  laca/u 
nimindimo'i'mic.  Misa'pl  kanisak  'asa/u  nama.  Mlnawa 
ka-i'ckwa-a-wasoyan,  minawa  ka'ijipa'kublyan.  Mri/<u  kaba- 
gljik  ka'totaman.  Mlsagu  iu  wandcinama'kayang.  Naim- 

20  bucu,   ninkackika'O'ninan  anita'kun." 


"Ou,  misa'  iu  kagabagijik  ka/rcittcigayan,"  i'kitowan 
Ini/u  Nanabucowan.  Mlsa'pan  aniklwanit.  Pitcmagiku 
aniba'kintanang  Nanabucu  8iwandawat,  oganonan  wlwan : 
"Mindimoya,  kigakomin.  Ambasanogu  awimadciblmina- 
25  lkwan,  misa  nangwana  wlnawa  odontaibaniwang  wandci- 
nanawat  Ii8i/u  namawa8.  Kaga't  kawln  klgapa'kadaslmin 
kicpin  kacki'toyan  48i/u  tcibimina'kwayan." 


Kaga't    ningakacki'ton    48i/u   tcibimina'kwayan,"  udigon 


225 

visit.  What  was  there  for  him  to  behold  as  he  went 
entering  in  !  Nanabushu  then  spoke  up  :  "  Why,  why,  why, 
my  old  friend !  You  are  getting  just  the  kind  of  food 
we  like.  Now,  where  did  you  kill  these  sturgeons?" 

"Why,  my  old  friend,  yonder  from  our  hole  in  the  ice 
was  where  I  killed  these  sturgeons." 

"Oh,  do  you  teach  me  how  you  did  to  kill  them." 

"Why,  simply  to  work  making  some  cord  set  this  old 
woman  of  mine.  Thereupon,  when  she  had  finished  with 
the  cord,  I  then  in  turn  began  making  what  I  should  use 
for  a  spear.  And  so  when  I  had  finished  it,  I  then  enlarged 
the  size  of  our  water-hole.  Accordingly,  on  that  very 
same  morning  did  my  old  woman  build  a  great  fire. 
After  that  she  bound  me  with  the  cord ;  after  she  had 
me  bound,  then  down  into  the  water  I  went.  When  I 
arrived,  after  some  little  time  on  the  way,  I  saw  a  sturgeon. 
When  I  speared  it,  I  then  jerked  upon  the  cord ;  then  out 
my  old  woman  drew  me.  Now,  that  was  when  I  slew  the 
sturgeon.  After  I  was  warmed  by  the  heat  of  the  fire, 
then  again  down  into  the  water  I  went.  And  that  was 
what  I  did  all  day  long.  And  that  was  the  way  we 
fished  for  sturgeon.  Nanabushu,  (the  one  that  lies  across) 
our  doorway  do  you  take  as  you  go." 

"Why,  this  is  what  I  will  do  throughout  the  whole  of 
every  day,"  said  Nanabushu.  And  then  straightway  home 
he  returned.  As  soon  as  Nanabushu  drew  open  the  entry- 
way  of  where  they  lived,  he  spoke  to  his  wife,  saying : 
"Old  woman,  we  have  some  food  given  us.  Now,  please 
do  you  set  to  work  making  some  cord,  for  it  is  the  truth 
that  from  their  water-hole  was  where  they  killed  the 
sturgeons.  Really  we  shall  not  be  in  want  of  food  if  you 
can  make  the  cord." 

"Truly,  I  shall  be  able  to  make  the  cord,"  he  was  told 

15 — FUEL.   AMER.   ETHN.    SOC.    VOL.    VII. 


226 

mi/u  wlwan.  Anlc,  mlsagu  cigwa  mindimoya  unabit  pimi- 
na'kwat ;  kaya  win  Nanabucu  odoci'ton  anit.  Wayabaninik 
misa  cigwa  kfklci'towat  kaya  48i/u  plmina'kwan.  Mlsagu 
cigwa  kigicap.  Mlnotc  madcawag  Ini/u  wlwan :  a'pidci 
kisinani.  Aba'pic  cigwa  tagwicinowat  i'i'ma  udonta-i'bani- 
wang,  a'kawa  ogagagwatciman  ini/u  Pa'klwisan :  "Anln, 
mtcisasl'kisi,  ka/rcictcigayan  klcpin  mbiwa  aninisagwa?" 


"Taya,   pisanigu  tabaswawag." 

Aba'pic  Nanabucu  kaki'tcibotawat,  mlsa7  cigwa  pa'kublt. 

10  Altawa,  mmotc  ki'tcikisinani.  Wlwan  kasagisitayabinika- 
nigut,  Nanabucu  ajipa'kuplt.  Kumagu  a'pl  anitagwicink, 
namawan  owabaman ;  Nanabucu  ajipacipa'wat,  uto'kibiton 
48i/u  ubimina'kw^anim ;  ajigitcitabanigut  lni/u  wlwan.  Kaga't 
minwantam  namawan  nisat.  "A'tiwa,  kawm  ba'pic  ninda- 

15  iyanicftanz!  kabagljik."  Mlnawa  ka'i'ckwa'a'wasut,  ajipa- 
'kublt.  Mlsax  kayabi  namawan  wabamat,  ajipacipa'wat. 
Mlsax  kayabi  to'to'kipitot  49i/u  pimina'kwan,  mlnawa  aciki- 
'tciwabinigut  Ini/u  wlwan.  Misa7  kayabi  namawan  nisat, 
mldac  kaga't  ninwandank  'asa/u  mindimoya,  kaya  Ia8a/u 

20  Nanabucu. 


Anlc  Pa'kiwis  anica  ugra'gwantcima8  anamiblg  iu  na- 
mawa8,  mlya'ta  nlnj,  a'pidci  kaya  mamanatisinit  iu  namawaG. 
Mlnawa  anupa'kupl  Nanabucu,  kawln  kago  owabandanz!n. 
A'pidci  a'kwanabawat,  intawa  acimockamut.  Mlnawa  ajra/- 
25  wasut,  kayabawasut  pa'kubi  mlnawa.  Mldac  kaga't  wasa7 
anu'i'cat.  A'pidci  aya'kvvanabawat,  intawa  acimockamut. 


227 

by  his  wife.  Well,  then  it  was  that  the  old  woman  sat 
down  to  work  making  cord ;  and  Nanabushu  too  made  a 
spear.  When  the  morrow  came,  then  they  were  done 
with  their  work  and  with  the  twine.  It  was  now  morning. 
Determined  were  he  and  his  wife  to  go  :  it  was  exceedingly 
cold.  At  the  time  when  they  came  to  their  water-hole, 
they  waited  first  to  inquire  of  the  Pilferer :  "  How,  my 
old  friend,  am  I  to  do  in  case  I  should  happen  to  kill 
heaps  of  them  ?" 

"Why,  they  are  easily  dried." 

When  Nanabushu  had  a  great  fire  going,  then  into  the 
water  he  went.  Oh!  it  was  extremely  cold.  When  by 
his  wife  he  was  bound  at  the  feet,  then  Nanabushu  went 
into  the  water.  When  he  was  come,  after  some  little  time 
he  saw  a  sturgeon ;  when  Nanabushu  speared  it,  he  jerked 
on  the  line ;  then  was  he  drawn  up  by  his  wife.  Truly 
pleased  was  he  to  kill  a  sturgeon.  "Why,  not  a  moment 
will  I  stop  all  the  day  long."  After  he  was  warmed  by 
the  fire,  then  again  he  went  into  the  water.  And  so 
another  sturgeon  he  saw,  which  he  speared.  And  so  when 
again  he  jerked  upon  the  line,  then  again  was  he  drawn 
out  by  his  wife.  Accordingly,  when  another  sturgeon  he 
slew,  then  really  pleased  was  the  old  woman,  and  Nana 
bushu  too. 

Now,  the  Pilferer,  by  the  way,  had  put  back  into  the 
water  some  sturgeons,  only  two,  but  sturgeons  that  were 
very  ugly  looking.  Again  into  the  water  went  Nanabushu, 
but  to  no  purpose,  for  he  did  not  see  anything.  When 
he  stuck  it  out  to  the  very  last  breath,  accordingly,  then 
up  to  the  surface  he  came.  Again  was  he  then  warmed 
by  the  fire.  After  he  was  warmed  by  the  heat  of  the  fire, 
he  went  into  the  water  again.  Thereupon  truly  a  long 
way  off  he  went,  but  without  result.  When  he  had  gone 
to  the  end  of  his  breath,  thereupon  up  to  the  surface  he 


228 

A'tawa !  a'pidci  krkatabawa.    "Awas  intawa  klwata,"  i'kitu 
Nanabucu. 

Ajikiwawat.  Kumasagu  mini'k  udanuklpimamawa8  'i8i/u 
unamamiwa'.  Aba'pic  ka'kitarnwawat,  mlsa'  cigwa'  Nana- 
5  bucu  wmi'tam  pa'kadat.  Ningudingigu  nantawikimwa, 
agawagu  uplna8  lisi/u  ugini8.  A'pidcisax  kawm  unisitu'ka- 
gusl  a8wi'kwa ;  wankitciciku  pa'kadawan  Ini/u  wiwan.  Nin- 
gutingigu  madca  Nanabucu  ubabagiwayanackimut  48i/u 
kawuna'pitod.  Ani'ijimadcat,  atpidcisa/  kisinani.  Cigwasa/ 

10  aninantawikinlwa,  pamagu  ningutingigu  saga'i'gan  matablt-, 
a'pidcisa  kmugamani.  Anasama'tank  inaka'kaya  anl'ija. 
Aniwa'k  udaniml'kawa8  ugini.  A'tawa !  a'pidci  krkatci. 
Ningutingigu  anipimacagamat,  pamagu  kago  nwantank 
madwasininik  ri*ma  mi'kwaming.  Aji'i'nabit,  kago  owa- 

15  bandan.  Ajinimina'kut,  pi'kwa'k  kra>(tani  ma'kutawagan 
asawawint.  Nanabucu  kacitina  omamon.  Ajigintcitawa- 
gunanank,  pamagu  kanonigut  awiya  :  "Nanabucu,  kina 'i8i/u 
klbi'kwa'k?" 


"Aye8,  nmsa,  nicin,  nimbi'kwa'k." 

20        "Kawln  win  kri-'kitus!  a'pl  Papa'kiwis  cawanimag." 
"Kaga't  kawm  nln  nindobi'kwa'k  osln,  nicln." 
"Nanabucu,  kigi'katc  mawln." 

Taya!  Nanabucu  ugistcikanawabaman.    Oganonan :  "Aci- 
winan  kigl'katc  !      Nindabwac  kuca." 

25        "TaVa't,    ta'wa't,  ta'wa't!     Kawln  kuca  win  kri^kitusi 
Pa'kiwis  a'pl  cawanimag." 


229 

came.  Poor  fellow !  he  was  very  much  chilled  by  the 
water.  "Off  for  home  now  let  us  go!"  said  Nanabushu. 

Then  back  home  they  went.  And  in  the  course  of 
time  they  ate  up  their  sturgeons.  And  by  the  time  they 
had  eaten  them  up,  then  was  when  Nanabushu  had  a 
turn  at  being  hungry.  And  once  while  looking  for  sweet- 
brier  berries,  only  a  few  of  them  he  fetched  home.  Scarcely 
any  nourishment  from  them  did  the  woman  get ;  continually 
hungrier  became  his  wife.  So  once  away  went  Nanabushu 
after  tying  his  old  wretched  bag  of  cloth  secure.  As  he 
started  forth  on  his  way,  it  was  extremely  cold.  In  a 
while  he  was  going  along  in  search  of  sweet-brier  berries, 
when  all  of  a  sudden  out  upon  a  lake  he  came ;  very 
long  indeed  was  the  lake.  Along  by  way  of  the  sunny 
side  he  went.  But  a  few  sweet-brier  berries  he  found 
along  the  way.  Poor  fellow !  he  was  so  very  cold.  Now, 
once  while  going  along  the  shore,  there  was  a  sudden 
sound  of  something  that  he  heard  fall  on  the  ice.  When 
he  looked,  he  saw  something.  When  he  went  out  on 
the  ice,  there  was  an  arrow  feathered  with  the  ear  of  a 
bear.  Nanabushu  at  once  took  it.  As  he  shoved  it  into 
the  snow,  he  was  suddenly  addressed  by  some  one  saying : 
"Nanabushu,  is  that  your  arrow?" 

"Yes,   my  little  brother,   it  is  my  own  arrow." 

"That  was  not  what  the  Pilferer  said  when  I  blessed  him." 

"Really,  it  is  not  my  arrow,   my  little  brother." 

"Nanabushu,   you   must  be  cold." 

Ah !  Nanabushu  was  closely  observing  him.  He  spoke 
to  him,  saying:  "How  can  you  say  that1  I  am  cold! 
Why,  I  am  sweating." 

"Come,  come,  come!  the  Pilferer  certainly  did  not  say 
that  when  I  blessed  him." 

1  Aciwinan,  "How  can  you  say  that,"  ...  an  adverbial  expression.  It  might 
be  put  in  this  form :  "The  idea  that"  .  . . 


230 

"Icta,  kaga't  ningl'katc!" 

"  'Au,   Nanabucu,  kabotawin." 

"  1AU,  potawacicin."     Kaga't  acinataga'kut  Nanabucu. 

Acipodawanit.     Ka'ki'tcipodawanit,  aTtawickuta  cingubl 
5   uda'paginani.      "Amba,   Nanabucu,  awazun." 

Ta'taya!   Nanabucu  ajra/wazut. 

Cigwasa7  tajikagPtciwan  kaya  tacigltaciga  nawan.  Aci- 
kanonigut :  "Taga,  Nanabucu,  mldcin  Ini/u  nindaciganan." 

"An,  aciwman  'Midcin' !  Nindanimucuwlna  kamidciyan 
10  Ini/u  gitaciganan  ?" 

"TaVa't,  ta^va't !  Kawln  kuca  win  krr'kitusl  Pa'kiwis 
alpl  cawanimak." 

"Icta,   kaga't  ningamldcinan." 

Kaga't  ubra^pagidoni.  Kumiginln,  kaskami'kwaniwan  ! 
15  "Nanabucu,  kagux  win  ckwantangan." 

Nanabucu  mlgu  ima  wanimo'k  ka'u'ndcipldomut.   Cigwasa 
ajimadantcigat  aca/u  Nanabucu,  kuniginln,  tapimipasigwlwan 
udoda'pinamini   48i/u  umackimut.      "Nanabucu,  wagunani'i'11 
ka'pimondaman  ?" 
20        "Ka,   ugimg  kuca  kapimomagwa." 

Udatcitwapinani,  panagu  tcatcatclpan  pangicino. 

"Tawa't,  tawa't !  Kwa'tcinantawln  klga'rniga'ta.  Anln 
wmi  iu  wandcitotaman  ?" 

"Nanabucu,    pisan    ayan.      Kawln    win    kri-'kitusi    a'pl 

25   Pa'klwis    cawanimak."     Aninimina'kowan    klmadwasikwa-i'- 

gawan.    Mldac  i'i'ma  pma'wanit  umickimutang  Ini/u  mi'kwa- 

min,    "Nanabucu,    ambasax,    pisindawicin !      Klcpin  papani- 

'tawiyan,     mri/>u     kawm    klgawabanicizl.       Umbom    wasa/u 


231 

"Why,  yes,  to  be  sure  I  am  cold!" 

"Very  well,   Nanabushu,   I  will  build  you  a  fire." 

"Good,  build  me  a  fire."  Truly  then  over  the  ice  towards 
the  land  went  Nanabushu. 

Then  the  other  built  a  fire.  After  he  had  a  big  fire 
going,  then  on  both  sides  of  the  fire  he  piled  the  balsams. 
"Come,  Nanabushu,  warm  yourself!" 

Ah !  now  Nanabushu  warmed  himself. 

Ere  long  the  other  took  off  his  moccasins  and  removed 
his  stockings.  Then  by  him  was  (Nanabushu)  addressed : 
"Now,  Nanabushu,  do  you  eat  those  stockings  of  mine." 

"Indeed,  why  should  you  say  to  me,  'Eat  them!'  Am 
I  a  dog,  that  I  should  eat  those  stockings  of  yours?" 

"  Come,  come !  The  Pilferer  really  did  not  say  that 
when  I  blessed  him." 

"Why,  yes,   of  course  I  will  eat  them." 

Truly,  the  other  flung  them  over  to  him.  Lo,  it  was 
the  dried  tail  of  a  beaver!  "Nanabushu,  do  not  leave  any 
of  it  uneaten." 

Nanabushu  thereupon  secretly  put  some  away  in  the  bosom 
of  his  garment.  When  Nanabushu  began  eating,  lo,  the 
other  rose  upon  his  feet  (and)  picked  up  (Nanabushu 's)  bag. 
"Nanabushu,  what  were  you  carrying  upon  your  back?" 

"Why,   only  some  sweet-brier  berries  was  I  carrying." 

The  other  turned  (the  bag)  upside  down  and  let  them 
spill,  and  straightway  in  every  direction  they  fell. 

"  Stop,  stop  !  There  is  a  chance  that  you  will  do  (us) 
harm.  Why  have  you  done  that?" 

"Nanabushu,  do  you  keep  silent.  The  Pilferer  did  not 
say  that  when  I  blessed  him."  Then  out  over  the  ice 
he  went  (where)  he  could  be  heard  (chopping).  And  so 
when  out  there  he  was  putting  the  ice  into  the  bag, 
"Nanabushu,  come,  do  you  listen  to  me!  If  you  fail  to 
heed  what  I  say,  then  you  will  not  live  through  the  winter. 


232 

mi'kwam,  awa'kwagam  klga'rciwananan.  Oma  tcinimina- 
'kuyan,  pacu'  anitagwicinan,  '  a'a'e7,  Nanabucu  kago  ubi- 
montan  -  -  ala/u,  kwungu'ir'k !'  klga-rni'tam.  Kagu'  aba- 
nabi'kan.  A'p!  mlcaga'kuyan  kawln  kayabi  kiga>i'nittanzl. 
5  Mldac  iwiti,  tclgayaT  andayag,  tci'a-ninantawabantaman 
tciwanatinag.  Mi'kaman  dac,  mri'ma  msatci/u  kam-ijaiyan. 
Ki'klcamatciwayan  mlnawa,  mldac  4ci/u  ka-i'cipagitciwaba- 
'kamat  'a8a/u  mi'kwam.  '  Kagux  win  abanabi'kan.  Pamadac 
kigicap  klgapmapim  Ca8a/u  kimindimo'i'mic.  Mlsa  4ci/u 
10  cigwa7  tcipa'kawininan." 


Aciumbiwanat  Nanabucu,  ajimadcat,  anigu'k  madci'ba'to. 
Pacugu  tagwicing  awlya  onondawa8 :  "  l  A'e'e71,  wagunan 
Nanabucu  pamontank?  Ala/u,  kwunku'u-'k!"  Ta!  mldac 
kaga't  anigu'k  madciba'to.  Kakacitinagu  pacu7  pitclngwus- 

15  kwani.  "Intigu  mfpi  kaga  kwugwa'u'kuyan,"  inantam 
Nanabucu.  Wagunaniwinan  ajipagitciwaba'kamat  Ini/u 
umi'kwamiman.  "  lAla/u,  kwungu'u-'k !"  i'kito  Nanabucu. 
A'tawa !  wantagu  kagat  kago  owabandanzln.  Mlnawa 
umbiwana.  Kwatcigu  majaga'kuba'tod,  mlnawa  ubagitcwa- 

20  ba'kaman.  "  lA'a/u,  kwungu'irk!"  ickito.  Pa'kita'i-ga  Ini/u 
umi'tigwabln,  kawln  kago  owabandanzln  •  pagwanagu  icipa- 
pa'kita'i'ga.  Mlnawa  udombiwananan  Ini/u  umi'kwamman. 
Misa/  cigwa  acimicaga'kut,  ani'i'cigu'plt ;  kaga't  unanta- 
wabandan  tciwanatinanik.  Kaga't  omi'kan  48i/u  wanatinanig. 


233 

Put  upon  your  back  this  ice,  (and)  to  the  other  end  of  the 
lake  shall  you  carry  it.  As  you  go  hence  over  the  ice, 
when  a  short  distance  on  your  way  you  have  come,  then, 
'Halloo,  there!  Nanabushu  has  something  upon  his  back  - 
come  on,  give  him  a  push!'  you  will  hear.  Do  not  look 
back.  When  you  get  across  the  ice  to  the  shore,  no 
longer  will  you  hear  the  sound.  And  then  over  there, 
nigh  to  where  you  live,  you  should  seek  for  a  great 
depression  in  the  earth.  And  when  you  have  found  it, 
then  down  the  hill  should  you  go.  When  you  come  out 
upon  the  summit  again,  then  you  should  put  down  your 
pack  of  ice.  Do  not  look  back.  And  not  till  in  the 
morning  shall  you  and  your  old  woman  go  to  look.  There 
fore  now  shall  I  leave  you." 

Then  up  Nanabushu  lifted  his  pack,  as  he  departed 
with  all  speed,  he  started  running.  And  when  a  short 
way  he  was  come,  he  heard  (various)  ones :  "Halloo,  there! 
what  is  Nanabushu  carrying  upon  his  back?  Come  on, 
give  him  a  push !"  Ah !  and  then,  to  be  sure,  with  all 
speed  he  started  running.  And  of  a  sudden  close  by 
rose  the  din  of  roaring  ice.  "It  seems  that  now  am  I 
nearly  pushed  over,"  thought  Nanabushu,  What  should 
he  do  but  lay  down  his  pack  of  ice.  "All  right,  give 
him  a  push !"  said  Nanabushu.  Poor  man !  not  a  single 
thing  did  he  really  see.  Again  he  took  up  his  pack. 
The  instant  he  gained  the  shore  from  the  run  over  the 
ice,  again  he  laid  down  his  pack.  "Very  well,  give  him 
a  push !"  he  said.  He  swung  to  hit  with  his  bow,  but 
nothing  he  saw;  and  blindly  did  he  strike  to  hit.  Again 
he  took  up  his  pack  of  ice.  Thereupon,  when  he  came 
off  the  ice  onto  the  shore,  then  on  up  inland  he  went; 
truly  he  sought  for  the  great  depression  in  the  earth. 
To  be  sure,  he  found  the  hollow  space.  In  time,  when 
he  was  come  at  the  top  the  hill,  he  put  down  his  pack. 


234 

Cigwasa  kata'kwamatciwat,  ubagitciwaba'kaman.  Ajra/ba- 
nabit,  panagu  namawa8  kasablnit.  Ani'i'cikiwat.  Anrrji- 
pmdigat  andawat,  "A'tawa,  wabang  klganama'kamin. 
Kaga't  pa'tanlnowag  namawag  kawabamagwa." 

Misa7  ajitibi'kat'inik.  Nayagigu  unicka.  Nanabucu 
Ajikanonat  wlwan:  "Ambagickana  unickan.  Kanantakin 
klki'kandanzln  tcinama'kayan  ?" 


Ajimadcawat  ijawat  iwiti  kawabamat  'ici/u  namawa8. 
Kuniginm,  a'pi  anisagatciwawat,  anln  ka'i'cinamowat? 
10  Wandcitagu  ka'i'ska'tanigwan  'isi/u  wanatina !  Inabiwat, 
iwiti  a'pidci  nawatinang  pajik  kra'biwan  Ini/u  pikwa'kucti- 
gwananamawan.  Agawagu  nabopiwagamisowan  anukaba- 
cimawat.  A'tawa !  kagatsa  mindcinawazi  lasa/u  mindimoya. 
Nanabucu  kanona :  "Indacka  kago  kiglpablnitarnitug." 


15  A'tawa!  wandagu  gaga't  a'pl'tanatamowat.  Kawm  wi'ka 
kago  ubidosln  anukro'sat  Nanabucu.  Ningutingigu  oga- 
nonan  wlwan :  "  Ambasa7,  unapi'ton  mackimut  *isi/u  kaba- 
bamiwanayan.  Minotc  nlawinantawi'irkimwa."  Ajimadcat 
Nanabucu.  Aniwa'k  udanimi'kawa  lisi/u  ugini8.  Cigwasa 

20  ani'u-nagucinini.  "Kawm  kanaga  intawa  nindaklwasl," 
inantam  Nanabucu. 


30.   NANABUSHU  AND  THE  WOLVES. : 

Ningutingigu  saga'i'gan  omada'kun.   Ajimadcl'a-daga'kut, 
wabigamanig    pacwabandank,  awiya  owabaman  pimadaga- 

i  See  Series  I,  No.  7,  p.  49. 


235 

On  looking  back,  (he  saw)  vast  numbers  of  sturgeon 
moving  about  in  the  water.  Then  on  his  homeward  way 
he  went.  As  he  went  on  into  where  he  (and  the  others) 
lived,  "Hurrah!  to-morrow  will  we  fish  for  sturgeon.  Truly, 
many  are  the  sturgeons  I  saw." 

And  so  night  came  on.  And  before  it  was  time,  up 
from  bed  rose  Nanabushu.  Then  he  said  to  his  wife : 
"Do  please  rise  up  from  bed.  Do  you  not  know  that 
you  are  going  to  fish  for  sturgeon?" 

Then  they  departed  to  go  to  the  place  where  he  had 
seen  the  sturgeons.  Lo,  when  they  came  out  upon  the 
summit,  what  were  they  to  behold?  Why,  completely  dry 
must  the  basin  have  become !  As  they  looked,  yonder 
in  the  very  centre  of  the  basin  lay  but  a  single,  large, 
round-headed  sturgeon.  And  scarcely  any  soup  did  it 
make  when  they  tried  to  cook  it.  Ah !  but  truly  disap 
pointed  was  the  old  woman  (at  not  getting  more  sturgeons). 
Nanabushu  was  addressed :  "  No  doubt  but  that  you  must 
have  failed  to  heed  what  was  told  you." 

Alas!  by  degrees  then  were  they  really  starving.  Never 
a  thing  did  Nanabushu  fetch  home  when  he  went  out  in 
vain  to  hunt.  And  once  he  spoke  to  his  wife,  saying : 
"Well,  tie  up  the  bag  which  I  will  carry  as  I  wander 
from  place  to  place.  In  spite  of  ill  luck,  I  will  go  seek  for 
sweet-brier  berries."  Then  departed  Nanabushu.  A  few 
sweet-brier  berries  he  found  along  where  he  went.  Then 
was  the  evening  coming  on.  "Not  at  all,  as  matters  stand, 
would  I  go  back  home,"  thought  Nanabushu. 

30.  NANABUSHU  AND  THE  WoLVES.1 

Now,  by  and  by  he  came  out  upon  a  frozen  lake.  As 
he  started  forth  on  the  ice,  as  nigh  to  the  narrows  of  the 

1  For  other  versions  see  Nos.  8  (p.  73),  9  (p.  85),  44  (p.  373). 


236 

'kupa'tonit;  aca  mlnawa,  nlwiwa8.     Kuniginln,  maTnganac! 
Ajiplpagimat :    aNistcimistca,   a'kawa,   kawabamininim  !" 


Kaga't     kipitciba'towa8 ;     aciwawanabinit    aninasi'kawat. 
Ajiganonat :    "  Nltcisasrkizl,  anti  acayag  ?" 


5  "Ka,  crc/'witi,  kicika'tikwaning,  mrrwiti  acayang.  Nibi- 
nunk  kra'santcigobanig  ogo/u  kitocimag,  ki'tci'a'yaban 
uginisawabamn.  Mldac  iwiti  acayang." 

"A'tiwa,  ml  gaya  nln  iwiti  acayan,  kicika'tikwaning,  - 
'  48i/u  tci'a'niwawltclwinaguk." 


10        Anic,   mri/>u  cigwa  wunagucininig. 

"Anlc  4isi/u,  Tcltclgwanowis,1  aninanta'irninamasiwan, 
magica  takisina  tibi'kat.  Taga,  kimicoma'i'wa  tani'a-n- 
to'irninama." 

Anic,  mlsa7  gaga't  Nanabucu  aninanta'U'ninamat.   Kawasa 
15   ni'tawusasi,     anuwltclwat     48i/u    ma'l'ngana8.       Ajikanonint 
Nanabucu:    "Ambasino,    antotamangigu  pimibaltoyang,  ml 
kaya  km  katotaman." 

Taya,  kaya  win  totam.      Anic  mldac  iu  kawln  kago  48i/u 
oso,  mldac  4si/u  wlnag  lisi/u  wasowat.    Kawln  kanaga  nomag 
20  cigwa  animaskawa'kwatininig. 


"Kaga't  mlmawlni  iu  tcinibut  kimicomanan,  maskawa- 
'kwatininig  'ici/u  wlnag.  Intawa  kico'tdwata."  Mldac  lasa/u 
pajik  maTngan  ubi'tawajan 3  aciwlwa'kwapitciga'tanig. 

1  The  name  by  which  one  of  the  young  Wolves  was  called. 


237 

lake  he  drew,  he  saw  some  one  running  past  over  the  ice; 
then  some  more,  four  of  them.  Behold,  (they  were)  Wolves! 
Then  he  called  aloud  to  them :  "  O  my  little  brothers ! 
wait,  I  wish  to  see  you." 

To  be  sure,  they  came  to  a  sudden  halt ;  then  they  sat 
down,  while  he  went  up  to  where  they  were.  Then  he 
spoke  to  them,  saying:  "My  old  friend,  whither  are  you 
going?" 

"Oh,  over  here,  for  the  place  of  cedar  boughs,  is  where 
we  are  bound.  Last  summer  did  these  nephews  of  yours 
make  a  cache  there,  a  great  bull  (moose)  they  killed  then. 
Now,  that  is  the  place  (for  which)  we  are  bound." 

"Why,  that  is  the  place,  too,  for  which  I  am  bound,  - 
to    the    place    of   cedar    boughs,   —  so  therefore  it  is  my 
wish  to  go  along  with  you." 

Well,  it  was  then  evening. 

"Now,  Thin-Tail,1  do  you  go  find  a  place  where  to  camp, 
for  perhaps  it  will  be  cold  in  the  night.  I  say,  let  your 
uncle  find  a  place  where  to  camp." 

So  thereupon,  truly  did  Nanabushu  go  to  find  a  place 
to  camp.  Not  at  all  was  he  familiar  with  (their  way  of) 
travelling,  as  he  tried  going  along  with  the  Wolves.  Then 
was  Nanabushu  told :  "  Come,  as  we  do  when  we  run 
along,  so  in  like  manner  should  you  do  too." 

Ah,  and  he  did  the  same.  Naturally,  there  was  nothing 
in  the  way  of  a  tail,  therefore  his  penis  was  what  he 
used  for  a  tail.  It  was  but  a  very  little  while  before  it 
was  frozen  stiff. 

"Surely  now  without  doubt  will  our  uncle  die,  for  that 
his  penis  is  frozen  stiff.  Therefore  let  us  warm  it  for  him." 
Accordingly,  with  the  top  blanket 3  of  one  of  the  Wolves 
was  it  wrapped  about  the  head.  And  very  awkward  was 
his  aspect  as  he  tried  in  vain  to  run  along.  In  time  he 

'2  Referring  to  the  tail  of  a  wolf. 


238 

A'pidcigu  wasi'tawinagusi  anupimiba'tod.  Cigwasa'  umi'kan 
a'pidci  tabinawanig.  "Misa/  oma  tcinibaiyang." 

"E1,  kawasa',  kitagfkatcimin." 

"Taga,  kin  Tcltcigwanowis,"  Inimawan  Ini/u  a'kiwa"zl 
5  ma'i'nganan. 

Gaga't  mldac  lisi/u  nantukabacit  a'pidci  omi'kan  anasa- 
•a-maninig.  "Mlsa7  oma  tcinibayang."  Anlc  mlsan  uto- 
'kwakuwabinanan. 

"  'Ala/u,    Nanabucu,    podawan,"    ina    Nanabucu.      Anlc 

10  misa7  Nanabucu  anawibotawat.     A'kawa  klci'kisagon  uglci- 

bawabinan.      Ajiganonint :    "Nanabucu,    anlnna    antotaman 

wrpotawayan?     Nackasa,    kanawabamicin    antotamink  wa- 

podawangin."     Kunigimn,  Ini/u  a'kiwanzl  maTnganan  pasi- 

gwlwan,  u'kwa'kwisininig  Ini/u  mlsan  acipacitcikwaskwaninit ; 

15   mlsa7  ickuta  ajipiska'kunanik. 


Cigwasa7  tibi'kadini,  ajikawicimut  Nanabucu.  A'tawa 
Nanabucu !  a'pidci  nondagusi,  a'pi'tcigl'katcit. 

"Icta,     kimicomanan     mlmawlni-r*11     wlkawatcit,    intawa 
pl'tawaca'i-'k," 
20        Pajik  pa'ijlnanawaninit. 

Wibago  amatciblso.  "Cl,  kagatsa  ou  animwanowic  nin- 
dabwackagun !"  Anlc  wlbagu  minawa  gl'katci.  Ajinonda- 
gusit,  "Anlnta,  pl'tawacai-'k  minawa  kimicoma'i'wa." 


Pajik     ajigikitut:     "Ingutci     kuca    ugra*'pagiton    anubl- 
25   'tawaca-a-g."      Kaga't     minawa     pa'i'crrnanowaninit     ini/u 


ma-rnganan. 


Mldac  na  iu  ajiwabaninig.  Cigwa  kigicap  ajikanonint 
Nanabucu:  "Nawa'kwag  mra-'pl  ka-u'di'tamang  48i/u  asan- 
tcigwan." 


239 

found  where  there  was  excellent  shelter  from  the  wind. 
"Now,  here  is  where  we  will  sleep,"  said  Nanabushu. 

"Why,  impossible!   we  might  be  cold." 

"I  say,  you,  Thin-Tail,  (go  look  for  a  camping-place)," 
thus  to  one  said  the  old  Wolf. 

It  was  so  that  when  he  looked  for  a  place  to  camp,  he 
found  a  place  that  was  exceedingly  windy.  "Here  is  where 
we  will  sleep."  So  a  great  pile  of  fire-wood  he  heaped  on. 

"All  right,  Nanabushu,  do  you  kindle  the  fire,"  was 
told  Nanabushu.  So  accordingly  Nanabushu  tried  in  vain 
to  kindle  the  fire.  He  first  tried  twirling  a  piece  of  cedar 
wood.  Then  he  was  addressed:  "Nanabushu,  how  do  you 
go  about  it  when  you  want  to  make  a  fire?  Just  look, 
observe  me  (and  see)  the  way  it  is  done  when  fire  is 
made."  Behold,  the  old  Wolf  then  rose  to  his  feet,  (and) 
over  where  lay  piled  the  heap  of  fire-wood  he  leaped ; 
thereupon  the  fire  blazed  up. 

It  was  now  getting  night,  when  down  to  sleep  lay  Na 
nabushu.  Poor  Nanabushu !  he  was  heard  making  a  very 
loud  noise,  he  was  so  cold. 

"I  declare,  our  uncle  no  doubt  is  about  freezing  to 
death,  therefore  put  another  cover  over  him." 

One  then  laid  his  tail  over  him. 

In  a  little  while  he  became  awake  because  of  the  warmth. 
"Oh,  how  really  much  am  I  made  to  sweat  by  this  con 
founded  tail  of  a  dog !"  So  in  a  little  while  he  was  again 
cold.  When  he  was  heard  making  a  noise,  "Why,  put 
another  cover  over  your  uncle,"  (said  the  old  Wolf). 

One  then  spoke  up:  "Why,  off  he  flung  the  cover  when 
I  tried  to  put  it  over  him."  Truly  again  the  Wolf  laid  his 
tail  (over  him). 

And  so  by  that  time  it  was  day.  Then  in  the  morning 
was  Nanabushu  addressed:  "By  noon  is  when  we  shall 
arrive  at  the  cache." 


240 

Ajimadcawat,    udanang  pimusawag  !ni/u  widalkiwanzlyan 

mojag    unlganri'gon.      Ningutingigu    uganonigon    ackiwanzl 

maTnganan  :    "Nanabucu,   ambasano,  intawa,  kagu7  usowa- 

lkan  i'i'wa  klnag,   osam  macimagwat.      Intawagu  acictciga- 

5   yamban  mi'i'u  icictcigan  tcipimusayan." 

Nanabucu  mlsa7  gaga't  acictcigat,  mlsa/  pitclnag  mino- 
pimusat.  A'pidcigu  udibi'a-  Ii8i/u  ma'rngana8.  Cigwasa 
tagwicinog  asantciguning.  Aca  tana'kamigisiwa8  mona'a'- 
minit  asantcigun.  Oganonigon  wita'kiwanzlyan  :  "Nanabucu, 

10  mlsa  cigwa  tciwlsiniyang.  4A4a/u,  wltci'i'wan  tcimo'ka'a*- 
sandcigung." 

Kaga't  Nanabucu  wltcl'i'wa  'i8i/u  mo'ka'rgadanig  asan 
tcigun.  Cayigwa  owabandanan  Nanabucu.  A'tawa,  wato- 
pa'kunisagon  kaya  'isi/u  anaga'kwan  katawananit.  "Tawa't, 

15  tawalt,  awanamwinanag  ugou!  Mri/>u  kawm  win  wi'ka  mld- 
cislm  Ini/u  mi'tigucan  !" 

"Nanabucu,  kagu7  ikidu'kan.  Naska  pitclnag  kigicap, 
kigaminowlsin." 

Pang!    mina    48i/u    udopa'kunisag    kaya    iu    anaga/kwan. 

20  "Kagux  win  nontatibi'k  wabandangan.  Pama  kigicap 
kawlsinimin."  Misax  cigwa  tibi'katinig  Nanabucu  ani'kwacing 
udalton  ^'^i^  kamlnint.  Ajinibat  Nanabucu.  Ningutingigu, 
tibi'kadinik  wagunanlwinan  owabandan  i-i'wa  kamlnint. 
A'tiwa,  kuniginln,  monsonagic  ml'i'wa  iu  wadopa'kunisagunk 

25  ka'i'cinank,  mmawa  wanaga'kwan  ml  Ini/u  ocobln.  Migu 
i8i/u  acipa'kwandank,  kaga't  uminu'pitan.  Mlsa7  mlnawa 
acra-'pi'kwacimut. 


Cigwasa    wabanini,    panagu    kamodtigisinit    4si/u    ma*rn- 
gana8,  wandagu  gaga't  minowlsiniwa8. 
30        "  'A'a711,    Nanabucu,    kaya  km  ablginan  kidacamigowin." 


241 

When  they  started,  behind  walked  he  and  his  old  com 
panion  who  always  had  him  keep  ahead.  And  once  he 
was  told  by  the  old  Wolf:  "Nanabushu,  I  beg  of  you, 
really,  do  not  use  your  penis  for  a  tail,  for  it  smells  too 
vile.  Therefore,  according  to  the  manner  you  are  accus 
tomed  (to),  so  you  do  when  you  travel." 

Nanabushu  then  truly  did  so,  whereupon  he  then  travelled 
with  ease.  And  very  well  he  kept  pace  with  the  Wolves. 
In  time  they  arrived  at  the  cache.  Already  were  the  others 
busily  at  work  digging  up  the  cache.  He  was  addressed 
by  his  old  companion:  "Nanabushu,  it  is  now  time  for  us 
to  eat.  Come,  go  aid  in  the  work  of  opening  the  cache." 

Truly,  Nanabushu  aided  them  in  the  work  of  opening 
the  cache.  In  a  while  Nanabushu  saw  (what  was  there). 
Why,  it  was  choice  fire-wood  and  some  bark  that  they 
were  taking  out.  "Stop,  stop,  you  rascals!  Why,  never 
is  this  wretched  wood  to  be  eaten." 

"Nanabushu,  do  not  say  that.  Just  you  wait  till  in  the 
morning,  you  will  have  nice  food  to  eat." 

A  little  was  given  him  of  the  choice  wood  and  the  bark. 
"Do  not  look  at  it  during  the  night.  Not  till  in  the 
morning  shall  we  eat."  Thereupon,  when  it  was  night,  then 
Nanabushu  placed  where  he  lay  his  head  that  which  had 
been  given  him.  Then  to  sleep  went  Nanabushu.  By 
and  by,  in  the  night,  what  should  he  do  but  look  at  that 
which  had  been  given  him.  Why,  behold,  a  moose-gut 
was  that  which  had  appeared  to  him  as  choice  fire-wood, 
and  the  bark  was  tenderloin.  Accordingly,  when  he  bit 
off  (a  piece),  he  truly  found  it  savory.  And  then  he  used 
it  again  for  a  pillow. 

In  time  came  the  morning,  and  forthwith  pleased  were 
the  Wolves,  and  very  heartily  indeed  did  they  eat. 

"Now,  then,  Nanabushu,  do  you  too  unwrap  the  food 
that  was  given  you." 

1 6 — PUBL.    AMER.    ETHN.    SOC.    VOL.    VII. 


242 

Nanabucu  ajiwabandank,  a'tawa,  ml  gayabi  udoba- 
'kunisag  kaya  48i/u  wanaga'kwan.  Ajikanonint  Nanabucu : 
"Tibi'kunksa  kiglwabandan  o*o'." 

"Kawm   ning!wabandanzm." 

5        "Nanabucu,  kitanabitacin  tibilkunk  'isi/u  klpa'kwandamo- 
wanan." 

"Intawa,  acami'k  kimicoma-i'wa." 

Mlsa  gaga't  acama,  wandagu  gaga't  Nanabucu  tawlsini. 
Cigwasa7    ajikanonint    Nanabucu:    "Intawa  kiwan.      Kama- 
10  tcita'i'ko  kimintimo'i'mic  kamldcit." 

"Kuwm,   osam  pa'kada.      Manu  kawidclwininim." 
"  1AU,  Nanabucu,  kawldclwiko.      Ayangwarnisin,  kwaya'k 
wi'i'ciwabisin.      Wabank    kigagusimin.      Wra-ntawantciwag 
ogo/u  kidocimag,   moson  wra*ntawabamawan.w 


15  Mlsax  weyabaninik  ajigusiwat.  A'pitci  kigicap  madcawa8 
48i/u  udockinawamiwa8 ;  wfkadac  animadcawag  Nanabucu 
Ini/u  wlda'kiwanzlyan  mada'arnawat  ma'I'ngana8.  Nayawa- 
lkwanik  mri/<u  uci'kawanigubanan  48i/u  moso8.  Pacigidacigu 
klmadcinicawaniguban,  mlsa7  pima'a'nawat.  Ningutingigu 

20  upimwackitiwinini  !ni/u  ma-rnganan  kl-a-ni'a''tani.  Nanabucu 
ajikanonint:  "Nanabucu,  anita'kunau  mi/u  ubl'tawacan  a11 
kitojim." 


"Anmta  katotaman  animumowic  ka-a'nita'kunaman?" 

"Taiya,  Nanabucu!  kawm  klta'i-'kitusl."  Ma-rngan  aji- 
25  'o'ta'pinang,  kuniginln,  ma'katawagin  udontcimamonini;  !ni/u 
ma'rnganan  pa'pawiwabinaminit. 

"Nicimisa,  nm  ninganipimiwitowan  nintocim  'i8i/u  ubl'ta- 
wacan."  Mlsa7  anicita4kunamawat. 


243 

When  Nanabushu  looked  at  it,  why,  it  was  yet  choice 
fire- wood  and  the  bark.  Nanabushu  then  was  told:  "Last 
night  you  really  looked  at  this." 

"I  did  not  look  at  it." 

"Nanabushu,  you  have  left  the  mark  of  your  teeth  on 
what  you  must  have  taken  a  bite  last  night." 

"However,  do  you  feed  your  uncle." 

Thereupon  truly  he  was  fed,  and  thoroughly  indeed  was 
Nanabushu  satisfied  with  food.  Presently  was  Nanabushu 
addressed:  "Therefore  go  you  back  home.  We  will  send 
by  you  some  food  for  your  old  woman  to  eat." 

"No,  she  is  too  hungry.    Please  let  me  go  along  with  you." 

"Very  well,  Nanabushu,  you  may  go  along  with  us.  Do 
you  be  careful,  in  the  right  way  do  you  conduct  yourself. 
To-morrow  we  will  move  camp.  For  some  game  do 
these  nephews  of  yours  intend  to  hunt,  for  moose  do  they 
expect  to  hunt." 

And  so  on  the  morrow  they  moved  camp.  Very  early 
in  the  morning  started  their  youths ;  and  a  long  while 
afterwards  departed  Nanabushu  and  his  old  companion, 
they  followed  in  the  path  of  the  Wolves.  At  about  noon 
was  when  they  laid  plans  how  to  get  at  the  moose.  Now, 
one  pursued  after  the  moose,  whereupon  they  trailed  after 
(the  moose  and  wolf).  And  once  some  fresh  dropping 
of  the  Wolf  lay  along  the  way.  Nanabushu  was  told : 
"Nanabushu,  as  you  go  along,  pick  up  the  top  blanket 
of  your  nephew." 

"What  am  I  to  do  with  the  foul  dropping  of  a  dog, 
that  I  should  pick  it  up  as  I  go  along?" 

"O  Nanabushu!  you  should  not  say  that."  When  the 
Wolf  picked  it  up,  lo,  a  black  cloth  he  picked  up  from 
the  place  •,  the  Wolf  then  gave  it  a  shaking. 

"My  little  brother,  let  me  carry  for  my  nephew  his  top 
blanket."  Thereupon,  as  he  went  along,  he  carried  it  for  him. 


244 

Misa'   48i/u  ani'rcinlca'rga'kawanit  anrijawat  lni/u  ma'r- 

ngana8.       Ningutingigu     mi'tigunk     pata'ka'kwisinini     48i/u 

wibitani  Ini/u  maTnganan.      "Nacka  kuca' !  kitocim  kapita- 

'kwa'a-gwan.     Taga,  kltcigubiton,   Nanabucu,  kitocim  Ii8i/u 

5   umi'tigwanwi  anitakwunamu1." 

"Anlnta  katotaman  animwabitic  kanita'kunaman  ?" 

"Nanabucu,  kagur  i'kitu'kan."  A'kiwanz!maTngan  aci- 
kl'tcigwandank.  Kunigimn,  mi'tigwanwi  udontcimamon. 

"Taga,  nm  ninganita'kunan." 

10  "Nanabucu,  kagu7  win  ingutci  pagito'kan.  Kigasanagra- 
kitocim  klcpin  ingutci  a'pagitowat." 

Ningutingigu  papima'a'nawat  'i8i/u,  kunigimn,  a'pidci 
pacigini  udadagwanasawan  nlpitayabanigusinit.  Nanabucu 
kanona :  "Awanan  km  kaci'kagwan  kitinandam?" 

15  Udicinowan  Ini/u  matci'kawa'a't,  ajiklgitut :  "Napisa  nac 
wlna  a11  mindimoyanc  wina-a/<u.  Ogowistcagu  miwagugu 
kanagaciwawat." 

"Kawln,  mlsaf  wa8au  kanagaciwat." 

Anipapimusawat.      Cigwa    a'pidci   ka'kra/niguban.      Nin- 
20  gutingigu    owabamawa8    cingicininit.      "  'A'e'e^,    kawlnnina- 
wln    kigigagoslmin.     'Ala/u,    Nanabucu,  ucl'tan,  kadacimo- 
su'kayank  kawici'tomin." 


Anlc  Nanabucu  anu'rnabit,  kawin  awiya  owabamasin 
tcra-binit  monson.  Anlc  miya'tagu  iu  umiskwlwagunaganik 
25  weyabandank.  A'pidcisa/  tatapisinlwa8.  Nanabucu  ajima- 
najitat,  mldac  ima  a'1'cat  a'i'tag  cingicininit  Ini/u  pacik  lni/u 
ma-I'nganan.  Wagunamwinan  upapasiguntciwapiskawan. 
"Atcimatclstaca!  mini'k  klgitanawa  ?" 


245 

And  so  along  the  trail  the  Wolves  made  in  their  pursuit 
was  the  way  (Nanabushu  and  the  old  Wolf)  went.  Now, 
once  there  was  sticking  out  of  a  tree  the  tooth  of  a  wolf. 
"  Oh,  look !  your  nephew  must  have  struck  the  tree  acci 
dentally.  I  say,  pull  it  out,  Nanabushu,  carry  along  your 
nephew's  arrow !" 

"What  am  I  to  do  with  the  miserable  tooth  of  a  dog, 
that  I  should  carry  it  as  I  go  along?" 

"Nanabushu,  do  not  say  that."  The  old  Wolf  took  it 
out  with  his  mouth.  Behold,  an  arrow  he  took  out. 

"I  say,  let  me  carry  it  along." 

"Nanabushu,  don't  you  fling  it  away.  You  will  make 
things  difficult  for  your  nephew  if  you  throw  it  away." 

Then  presently,  while  trailing  after  the  Wolves  (and  the 
moose),  lo,  (they  saw  that)  one  of  them  went  with  dragging 
feet  through  the  snow  as  they  moved  abreast  in  line.  Nana 
bushu  was  addressed  :  "  Which  one  do  you  think  is  swifter  ?" 

He  pointed  to  the  one  that  trailed  along  in  difficulty, 
then  he  said:  "Why,  this  one  here  is  nothing  but  an  old 
hag.  Now,  these  are  the  ones  that  will  lead  in  the  run." 

"No,   this  is  the  one  that  will  be  in  the  lead." 

On  then  they  went  walking.  Now,  very  hard  were  they 
pressing  the  pursuit.  Then  by  and  by  they  beheld  the 
others  lying  down.  "Halloo!  why,  they  are  getting  us 
something  to  eat.  Come  on,  Nanabushu,  get  ready !  a 
place  for  us  to  dress  the  moose  we  will  make." 

Naturally,  Nanabushu  tried  looking  about,  but  to  no 
purpose :  he  saw  nothing  of  any  moose  that  was  there. 
Now,  the  only  thing  he  saw  was  some  blood  on  the  snow. 
Thoroughly  sated  was  each  one  with  food.  Then  Nana 
bushu  went  for  some  balsam  boughs,  and  the  way  he 
went  was  directly  where  one  of  the  Wolves  lay.  What 
should  he  do  but  give  him  a  kick  to  make  him  stand  up. 
"For  goodness,  sake!  have  you  eaten  so  much  as  that?" 


246 

Tcanga'kwanowan.       "Kagatsa7    kiwawisagicka11,    Nana- 

bucu.    Kagu7  icictciga'kan,  Nanabucu. "    Kanona  Nanabucu : 

"Pisan  ayan.    Klcpin  mlnawa  kago  wltotaman,  mri/<u  kawin 

klgacamigosi."     A'taya,  Nanabucu  anigu'k  ano'kl.      Kawa- 

5   nalpl  uglcl'kanawa  48i/u  watacimosu'kawat.     Ajiganonawat : 

"Mlsa7  iu  kiglcl'taiyank."     Papasigwlwa8  pimi'i'cawa8  i'i'ma 

kra>cpicimonitkawat.      Cigwa    pacik    cicigagowawan,    mlgu 

i/u    pacig    Ii8i/u    usaglni    ajimiziwapangisininik.      Kaga't  ma- 

ma'katandam     Nanabucu,     kaga't     minwantam ;     wantagu 

10  ba'kic  nanagamosiwi,  apl'tciminwandank   'aca/u  Nanabucu. 


"Ambasa7,  agwawanackukata." 

Gawana'pl  uglci'tonawa  lisi/u  agwawana'k.  Mlsa7  pitcinag 
klcisa/kwawat  Nanabucu  a'pidcisa7  tawlsini.  Aba'pic  tapi- 
'kadinik,  ajinibawat.  Cigwa  wabanini.  Kigicapigu  kigito- 
15  wan  Ini/u  a'kiwanzimaTnganan  :  "Mlsa7  cigwa  tcigl'a-'kay- 
amban.  Anlc  kawln  wfka  awiya  ninganawabamigosl  48i/u 
waya'kayanin.  Intawa  a'kawa  padagwlngwacinuk." 


Kaga't  padagwmgwacinowag.  Anic  Nanabucu  kaya  win 
padagwlngwacin.  Indigunata  madwaganagantciga,  inantam 

20  Nanabucu.  Wagunanlwinan  pangl  odontcikanawabaman 
na'i'tak  udacigagwatigwantamini  iu  u'kan.  Wagunanlwinan 
ajipicagwantaminit.  A'tawa !  a'pidci  i'i'ma  usklcigunk  aci- 
pangisininik.  Nanabucu  misa7  acigiwaskwackagut.  Anicagu7 
ta'kabawanint  wandcimi'kawit.  Kami'kawit,  kanona  :  "Nana- 

25   bucu,  kanawabamiwamban  48i/u  a'kayan." 


247 

Up  he  raised  his  head.  "Really,  you  hurt  me  with  your 
kick,  Nanabushu.  Don't  you  do  that  again,  Nanabushu." 
Nanabushu  was  told:  "Be  quiet.  If  you  intend  doing 
anything  (like  that)  again,  then  you  will  not  be  fed." 
Oh,  but  Nanabushu  labored  hard.  In  a  little  while  they 
finished  working  on  where  they  intended  to  dress  the 
moose.  Then  they  said  to  him:  "Therefore  are  we  ready." 
Then  up  they  rose  to  their  feet  (and)  came  over  to  the 
place  where  they  had  spread  out  the  balsams.  Presently 
one  began  to  vomit,  whereupon  the  whole  of  one  foreleg 
fell.  To  be  sure,  amazed  was  Nanabushu,  really  pleased 
he  was  •  and  during  all  the  while  he  hummed  a  song,  so 
very  pleased  was  Nanabushu. 

"Come,  let  us  make  a  meat-rack!" 

In  a  little  while  they  completed  the  meat-rack.  There 
upon,  when  they  had  finished  cooking,  Nanabushu  became 
thoroughly  sated  with  food.  When  it  began  to  grow  dark, 
they  then  went  to  sleep.  In  time  came  the  morrow.  And 
in  the  morning  up  spoke  the  old  Wolf:  "Therefore  now 
will  I  make  some  grease  from  the  bones.  Of  course,  by 
no  one  am  I  ever  observed  while  boiling  grease  from  the 
bones.  On  that  account  you  shall  first  cover  up  your  faces." 

To  be  sure,  they  covered  up  their  faces.  Now,  Nana 
bushu  covered  up  his  face  too.  It  seemed  that  he  heard 
the  sound  of  bones  being  cracked  with  teeth,  so  thought 
Nanabushu.  What  would  he  do  but  take  a  little  peep  at 
him  at  the  very  moment  when  he  was  gnawing  ravenously 
upon  a  bone.  What  should  (the  Wolf)  do  but  let  (the 
bone)  slip  from  his  teeth.  Poor  (Nanabushu) !  right  square 
across  his  eyes  it  fell.  Nanabushu  was  then  knocked  out 
of  his  senses.  It  was  only  by  having  water  splashed  upon 
him  that  he  was  revived.  WVfter  he  had  revived,  he  was 
addressed  :  "  Nanabushu,  you  must  have  watched  me  while 
I  made  grease  from  the  bones." 


248 

Misa'  iu  minawa  acitibi'katinik ;  cigwa  wabanini.  A'pidci 
kigicap  kigitu  Nanabucu:  "  Mistcatcigwa  wra^kayan.  Kawm 
anistca  wl'ka  ninganawabamigostc!  cici/u  wa/a-'kayanin. 
Intawa  padagwmgwacinuk." 

5  Amc,  ga'kina  ajipadagwlngwacinowat,  Nanabucu  madwa- 
wa-i-ga  blgwa*a*nk  Ini/u  u'kanan.  Amc,  a'pici  pimiti'kwa- 
cinon  Ini/u  a'kiwa^Ima'rnganan.  Wagunanlwinan  udani- 
nazi'kawan.  Kamamot  udo'kanim,  gi^ci'a'niguk  u'kwagana- 
ning  ajiba'ki'ta/o'wat.  Wantagu  gagalt  mri/<u  ajitayapita- 
10  ganamat.  Kagatsa  sagisiwag  igi/u  wawosiwat.  Tawa7! 
ajita'kabawanawat.  Gaga't  pang!  kago  ina  ma'kawinit : 
"Nanabucu,  intawa  mri/>u  ijickwa'tan,  usam  wltclwigoyan, 
anodcigu  kiticiwabis." 


"Kawln,   manogu  kiwltciwininim !" 
i  $        "  1A/U,   Nanabucu,  pisan  ayayan  kawltclwigo." 

Wayabaninig  kabaglcik  wlsiniwag.  Cigwa  wanagucininig 
klgitowan  Ini/u  a'kiwa^z!  ma-I'nganan :  "Intawasa  wabang 
kamadcamin  tcigusiyang." 

Anlc     Nanabucu     nawatcigu     clnganima.       "Nanabucu, 
20  ambasa,  wabank  klwipa'kawinigo." 

"Kawln.  Ambasano,  Ia8a/u  pacik  nintocim  ningawitcrar- 
yawa  kicpin  inandaman.  Kawm  wlcka  kago  ta-i'ciwabisisi." 


"Anlc    na,    Nanabucu,    kammin    'aVu  ninidcanis.     Kigi- 
lkanimin  manitowiyan,  mi'i/>u  wa'u-ndcimininan." 


249 

And  so  it  was  night  again ;  then  came  the  morrow. 
Very  early  in  the  morning  up  spoke  Nanabushu :  "And 
now  I  want  to  make  some  grease  from  the  bones.  Never 
for  the  mere  sake  of  observing  am  I  watched  when  making 
grease  from  bones.  Therefore  cover  up  your  faces." 

Now,  when  all  covered  their  faces,  Nanabushu  could  be 
heard  breaking  up  the  bones.  Now,  in  plain  view,  with 
his  head  resting  on  his  side  (facing  Nanabushu),  lay  the 
old  Wolf.  What  should  he  do  but  go  over  to  where  (the 
Wolf  was).  When  he  had  picked  up  his  bone,  then  with 
all  his  might  upon  the  back  of  his  neck  he  struck  him. 
To  be  sure,  he  then  laid  him  out  completely  with  the  blow. 
Really  scared  were  they  who  were  his  children.  Poor 
fellow!  they  then  dashed  cool  water  on  him.  Indeed,  a 
little  something  was  said  (to  Nanabushu)  after  (the  Wolf) 
had  revived:  "Nanabushu,  therefore  now  you  had  better 
cease,  too  much  have  you  been  in  our  company,  and  you 
do  things  you  should  not." 

"Nay,  please  let  me  go  with  you!" 

"Very  well,  Nanabushu;  if  you  behave,  you  may  go 
along." 

On  the  morrow  throughout  the  whole  day  were  they 
eating.  When  evening  came  on,  then  up  spoke  the  old 
Wolf:  "Therefore  to-morrow  will  we  depart  to  find  another 
place  to  camp." 

Now,  Nanabushu  was  somewhat  disliked.  "Nanabushu, 
come!  to-morrow  we  will  part  company  with  you." 

"Nay.  Please  let  me  remain  with  one  of  my  nephews 
if  it  be  your  will.  Never  will  anything  (harmful)  happen 
to  him." 

"Of  course,  Nanabushu,  I  will  give  you  one  of  my 
children.  I  know  that  you  are  a  manitou,  for  such  is  the 
reason  why  I  give  him  to  you." 


250 


3 1 .  THE  DEATH  OF  NANABUSHU'S  NEPHEW,  THE  WOLF. 

A'taya,  kaga't  minwantam  Nanabucu.  Wayabaninig 
kusiwa^.  Pacigigu  utociman  kaya  wlnawa  ingutcigu  icima- 
dcawag.  Uganonigon  Ini/Ll  udociman  :  "Nanabucu,  pacugu 
kiganibamin."  Misa'  a'i'na'a-nat  udociman.  Kumagu  a'pl 
5  cigwa  owabaman  ani'tawanini'k  namadabinit.  "Nos,  mro'ma 
tcinibaiyank,"  Nanabucu  udigon.  Ka'rskwawlsiniwat,  awa- 
ningwami.  Klciginibat.  Magwagu  nanamadabit  pamagu 
wandcimawinit  Nanabucowan.  Ajidclcabinat.  "Ci,  indaska 
nm  nimanabamigutug,"  udinan.  Cigwa  tayanibanit,  kusku- 
10  siwan.  Amc,  tana'kamigisi  Ia8a/u  ma-rngan.  "Anm  ana- 
bandaman  klmawiyan  ?" 


"A'tawa,   nindocim  kimanabamin.      Wabang  'aca/u  mons 
wl'piminicawat.     Ambasano,    kagu"    ickwa    pagito'kan   4ei/u 
mi'tigons  slblnsing  misawagu  cigwa  tababamat  Ia8a/u  mons-, 
15   mlgu  iu  wrrcimindcimantan." 


Cigwasa7  wabanini.   Kigicap  madcawan  wi'piminica'i'ganit, 

Nanabucu    animadca,   udociman  pima'a'nat.      Cigwasa7  aci- 

'kawanit  lisi/u  uci'kawanigubanan  lni/u  monson.    Anlc,  a'pidci 

slgwanini.      Misa    iu    a'i-na'a'nat    kaya    mri'wa  iu  acinama- 

20  'tonit  ini/u  udociman ;  mi'tigons  ani-a^pagitonit  i'i-ma  pangi 


3i.   THE  DEATH  OF  NANABUSHU'S  NEPHEW,  THE  WoLF.1 

Ah,  truly  pleased  was  Nanabushu.  On  the  morrow 
they  moved  camp.  And  with  one  of  his  nephews  he 
went  off  in  another  direction.  He  was  addressed  by  his 
nephew  saying:  "Nanabushu,  not  far  away  shall  we  stop 
for  the  night."  And  so  he  followed  in  the  tracks  of  his 

o 

nephew.  Some  distance  on  the  way  he  saw  (his  nephew) 
seated  in  a  spot  free  from  snow.  "My  father,  here  is  a 
place  for  us  to  sleep,"  Nanabushu  was  told.  After  they 
had  finished  eating,  he  made  ready  to  sleep.  He  then 
had  a  nap.  And  while  (the  Wolf)  was  yet  sitting  up,  all 
of  a  sudden  into  weeping  burst  Nanabushu.  Then  he 
waved  to  him  with  the  hand.3  "Foh,  (I)  fancy  that  he 
probably  is  having  a  bad  dream  about  me,"  he  said  of  him. 
When  (Nanabushu)  had  sleep  enough,  he  then  woke  up. 
Now,  busy  at  work  was  the  Wolf.  "What  were  you 
dreaming  about,  that  you  should  weep  ?" 

"Ah,  my  nephew,  I  had  a  bad  dream  about  you. 
To-morrow  you  will  pursue  a  moose.  Please  don't  you 
delay  throwing  a  stick  into  the  brook,  even  though  you 
are  then  in  sight  of  the  moose.  Now,  do  try  to  keep  that 
in  mind." 

Now  the  morrow  was  at  hand.  In  the  morning,  when 
(the  Wolf)  departed  to  go  in  pursuit  (of  game),  Nanabushu 
set  out ;  in  the  trail  of  his  nephew  he  followed.  Now,  by 
the  trail  he  made,  (the  Wolf)  was  stalking  the  moose.3 
By  the  way,  it  was  well  on  towards  spring.  That  was 
how  he  trailed  up  (his  nephew),  and  that  was  how  he 
could  tell  by  the  trail  (what)  his  nephew  was  doing ; 

1  For  other  versions  see  Nos.   10  (p.  89),  45  (p.   389). 

2  In  a  disdainful  way. 

3  It  takes  a  great  deal  of  manoeuvring  to  come  upon  the  moose  and  not  be  discovered. 


252 

slblnsiwa'kamiganik ;  cigwasa  tapabamaniguban  Ini/u  monson  ; 
midac  kaga't  ki'tci  anigu'k  madcanigubanan  Ini/u  odociman ; 
midac  lisi/u  cigwa  tabibinanigubanan  'a8a/u  maTngan  a'pidci 
pang!  slblnsiwa'kamiganik.  Migu'  mmotc  acawikwaskwa- 
5  nigubanan,  ka/ijidiskf  kag  i*i/<u  siblns,  midac  ima  nanawa- 
gam  ka'ijipangicink.  'Panagu  kasaswanik  Ini/u  u'tawagan. 
Mlsagu  4si/u  kawln  kimoskamuslg.  Anlc  mlsa  kiwanandank 
tci-a^pagitod  iu  mi'tigons. 


Nanabucu  cigwa  odababandan  sibi  pimi'tigwayanik,  lpana 
10  udociman  pa'kublkawanit.  "A'tawa!  mlmawlnini-i'u  klnisa- 
bawat  Ia8a/u  nindocim."  Ani'iji-a'cawa'U't ;  miziwa  nlzatci- 
wan  anu'i'ca.  Mlsa7  kawln  inkutci  unamaasln.  Gitcraeni- 
gu'k  ajimawit  Nanabucu ;  mlsa7  kabagljik  pabamawit, 
anunantunawat  Ini/u  udociman.  Skwatci  midasuo^un  anu- 

•  •  o 

15   nantuna'i'gat,    mlsa7    kawln  umi'kawasln.      A'pidcisa  cigwa 
kawanandam. 


Ningutingigu  nisatciwan  icimadcat  Ii8i/u  sibi,  ningutingsa 
papimacagamat,  owabaman  uglskimanisin  agosinit  i'i'ma 
nibl'kang  ima  inabinit.  Wagunamwinan  ugaglma'a'n ; 
20  pacu7  ododisan.  Anawi'i'cinawatinat,  pangri-gu  upicigupi- 
nan.  Midac  48i/u  ka-i-'pinagubanan,  mri*u  klnlskawayantipat 
asa/u  uglskimanisl.  Ajiganonigut  uglskimanisin  :  "Utcltayap 
Nanabucu  mwlwlntamwaban  win  Ini/u  u'tojiman." 


"Tiwa,  nicimisa7 !  wagunan  wawlntamawiyan  ?" 


253 

(he  saw)  that  (his  nephew)  had  flung  a  small  stick  ahead 
on  going  down  into  the  dry  bed  of  a  little  brook ;  (he 
saw)  where  (the  Wolf)  had  come  in  sight  of  the  moose  at 
the  time ;  and  then  really  with  great  speed  was  his  nephew 
going  at  the  time ;  and  then  now  was  the  Wolf  overtaking 
(the  moose)  at  where  there  was  a  dry  bed  of  a  very  small 
brook.  But  in  an  unguarded  moment,  when  he  tried  to 
take  it  with  a  leap,  apart  spread  the  brook,  and  so  far 
out  yonder  in  the  middle  of  the  stream  l  he  fell.  And 
at  once  there  was  ringing  in  his  ears.  And  then  he  did 
not  come  up  to  the  surface.  W7ell,  this  was  because  he 
had  forgotten  to  throw  the  little  stick  (ahead  of  him). 

Nanabushu  then  came  in  sight  of  a  river  that  went 
flowing  by,  straight  on  down  to  the  water  he  trailed  his 
nephew.  "Alas!  it  is  possible  that  that  nephew  of  mine 
has  drowned."  Then  on  over  to  the  other  side  he  went; 
everywhere  downstream  he  went,  but  in  vain.  And  so 
nowhere  saw  he  a  sign  of  him.  With  great  affliction  then 
wept  Nanabushu ;  whereupon  all  day  long  he  wandered 
weeping,  as  he  sought  in  vain  for  his  nephew.  For  full 
ten  days  he  sought,  but  without  result,  for  he  did  not  find 
him.  Completely  now  was  he  starving. 

Now,  once  while  down  the  course  of  the  river  he  was 
going,  once  while  he  was  walking  along  the  shore,  he 
saw  a  kingfisher  perched  aloft  (and)  looking  down  into 
the  water.  What  should  he  do  but  slip  stealthily  up  to 
it ;  nigh  up  to  it  he  came.  In  an  attempt  to  grab  it  he 
just  missed  catching  it.  And  the  place  where  the  king 
fisher  was  seized  at  the  time  was  by  the  tuft  on  its  head. 
Then  he  was  addressed  by  the  Kingfisher  saying:  "About 
the  anal  gut  of  his  nephew  was  I  going  to  tell  Nanabushu." 

"O  my  little  brother!  what  were  you  going  to  tell  me?" 

1  A  stream  that  of  a  sudden  and  miraculously  came  into  existence  the  moment 
the  Wolf  disobeyed  the  warning. 


254 

"Ka,  kitocim.  Ninganawabama  ima  nibrkang  kri'na- 
biyan ;  mra'<u  kanawabamag.  Nanabucu,  ambasano,  klga- 
wlntamon  ka'i'ciwabisit  lasawa  mantcinawasiyan.  Mlginmrr11 
ka/i'cra'yat  Ia8a/u  kitocim :  ugimamicibici  uglwuda'pinan  Ini/u 
5  kidociman.  Imadac  sagitawag  iu  slbi  mri'ma  ayag  'iY11 
mlnisinatawanga ;  mldac  ima  andaciklciganicit  'a8a/u  ugima- 
micipici  klcpln  mica'kwatinig.  A'pidci  minuglcigatinig  ml 
pitclnag  agwa'tat  rrma  mlnisinatawangang.  Nanabucu, 
kicpin  babmi'tawisiwan,  kitawabama  'asa/u  kitocimiwayan, 

10  klpa'kuna  kuca  'asa/u  kidocim.  Mlgu  48i/u  ka/i'citabwa'ta- 
wiyan  ka'i'ciwabisit  'i'Y'wa  ka'u-ndciwani-a't  kidocim. 
Pa'tanlnowan  kanawanimigut.  Kicpin  idac  win  nondawiyan 
'i8i/u  ka'i'ninan,  mlgu  iu  wato'tawatigu,  tcitotawitiban. 
Ambasano  mi'tigwab  klga'u'cra/.  Kl'kici'a'tidac,  mlnawa 

15  klga-u'citon  'isi/u  pikwa'k  'i'i'-wa  kayabatci'toyan.  Klga- 
minin  'isi/u  kanaba'i-gayan." 


Nanabucu  ominigon  pajig  mi/u  uskanjmi.  Ajikanonigut : 
"Nanabucu,  mra'wa  kanaba-i'gayan  48i/u  kibikwa'k.  Mam- 
wa'tcidac  apaskwackwai  ml  au  ka-u-dastcablyan.  A'pidac, 

20  Nanabucu,  wi'pimwat,  kagu"  win  wlyawink  pimwa'kan. 
Tcina'tacink  mri'tinunk  kapimwat  ayangwamisin.  Wlpisin- 
dawicin.  Kaya  'isi/u  anusagan  tci'u ji'toyan,  a'pidcigu  klga- 
mistca'ton  'ici/u  anusagan.  A,  kicpin  a/ta  manidowiyan, 
miya'ta  iu  kago  tcina'pinanat.  Manidowi  ugimamicibicl. 

25  Misagu  lisi/u  mini'k  aciki'kino'a-monan.  Ayangwamisin, 
kagux  anwa'tawici'kan." 

1  The  water-monsters  of  lakes,  rivers,  and  seas.  2  From  the  fibre. 


255 

"Why,  about  your  nephew.  I  was  watching  for  him 
yonder,  where  I  was  looking  into  the  water-  he  was  the 
one  I  was  watching  for.  Nanabushu,  listen !  I  will  declare 
to  you  what  happened  to  him  for  whom  you  have  a  longing. 
Now,  this  was  what  became  of  your  nephew :  the  chief  of 
the  big  lynxes l  has  seized  your  nephew.  Now,  yonder, 
where  the  river  flows  out  into  the  open,  is  an  island  of 
sand;  and  it  is  there  the  chief  of  the  big  lynxes  whiles 
the  day  away  when  the  sky  is  clear.  When  the  day  is 
very  pleasant,  then  from  the  water  he  proceeds  out  upon 
the  sandy  island.  Nanabushu,  if  you  heed  what  I  say, 
you  can  behold  the  skin  of  your  nephew,  for  flayed  was 
that  nephew  of  yours.  Therefore  shall  you  believe  me 
concerning  what  befell  your  nephew  when  you  lost  him. 
By  many  is  he  guarded.  Now,  if  you  harken  to  what  I  say 
to  you,  then  whatsoever  you  may  wish  to  do  to  (the  chief 
of  the  big  lynxes),  that  you  may  do  to  him.  Therefore 
a  bow  do  you  make.  And  when  you  have  finished  it,  you 
shall  next  make  the  arrow  which  you  are  to  use.  I  will 
give  you  what  you  shall  use  for  a  point  (on  your  arrow)." 

Nanabushu  was  then  given  one  of  the  claws  (of  the 
kingfisher).  Then  he  was  addressed:  "Nanabushu,  that 
is  what  you  shall  use  for  a  point  on  your  arrow.  And 
of  all  things,  it  is  from  flag-reed3  that  you  shall  obtain 
your  bowstring.  And  when,  Nanabushu,  you  are  ready 
to  shoot  him,  do  not  shoot  him  in  the  body.  Where  he 
casts  his  shadow  3  is  the  place  for  you  to  shoot  him.  Do 
you  be  careful  that  you  heed  my  words.  Likewise  a  raft 
shall  you  build,  and  very  large  shall  you  make  the  raft. 
Oh,  if  you  were  only  a  manitou,  then  would  you  be  able 
to  get  him  under  your  power!  A  manitou  being  is  the  chief 
of  the  big  lynxes.  Now,  that  is  as  much  as  I  shall  impart 
to  you.  Take  pains,  do  not  fail  to  follow  my  words." 

3  Shadow  and  soul  are  associated  together  as  the  same  thing. 


256 

"Oun,  mlgwetc  wandamawiyan.     Mackut,  tcipicigantaman 
kiya/u  klga-i-cH-n." 

"Mlgwetc,  Nanabucu,   Wwa  a'kitoyan." 
Mlsa  cigwa  Nanabucu  madci'tad  wawacra/t  ugiskimanisin. 
5   Cigwasa'    ka'klcra/t,    "Mrru    iciwabandisun,    ugickimanizl," 
udinan. 

Misa'     gaga't     ajiwabandisut,    gaga't    piciganimu    casa/u 
uglckimanisi. 

"Mlsa7    iu   ka'i'cinagusiyan  tcra'nra-'kiwank,"  i'kido  Na- 

10  nabucu.       Mlsa7     Nanabucu     ajimadcat,     msatciwan     icat. 

Pacugu  tagucink,  kaga't  owabandan  saga'i'gan.      Waguna- 

niwinan     udoci'ton     Ii8i/u    anusagan,    a'pitcigu    umistca'ton. 

Ka'klci'tot,   ajiposit  aji'ijat  ima  minisina'tawanganik.      Wa- 

gunaniwlwinan  ajikabat  ima  rni'tawangang.      A'taya,  awiya 

15  pimi'kawawa^',    anotc    awiya    pimi'kawawa8.      Mlsa7    cigwa 

nayap     ajiposit,    ingutcidac    ugaton    48i/u    utclman.       Misa 

cigwa    madci'tat    umi'tigwabln  uci'a't  kaya  Ii8i/u  upikwa'k ; 

uji'tod    kaya  48i/u  kanaba'a*nk,  udockanjlman  naba'i'gagat. 

Wawinga  ka'klci'tot,   cigwa  tibi'kadini.     Misa  cigwa  ajiwa- 

20  baninig,    Nanabucu    ajiklgitut:    "Ambasano,  tawi'a'nwa'tin 

kabaglcik,  kayagu  tciwlmicakwa'k."     Nanabucu  oma  nawa- 

tcigu  no'pimmg  aji'a-satisagu'kasut.    Cigwa  prrcpagotcinon 

ini/u  kisison,  owabandan  kagicibatciwaninik  48i/u  saga'i'gan. 

Ni'tam    omaka'km    mockamowan,   kayagu  anotcigu  i'i'wisa 

25   manido8,    kalkina   awiya  mlgu   48i/u  pamlcagwa'tanit  'i 

minisinatawanganik.      Mlgu  iu  piminibanit  anint. 


"Ambasano,  aiyangwamisin,"  i'kito  au  ma'kwa :    "Indigu 


257 

"Oh,  (I)  thank  (you)  for  what  you  have  told  me.  In 
return,  I  will  make  you  so  that  you  will  be  proud  of 
yourself." 

"(I)  thank  (you),   Nanabushu,   for  what  you  say." 

And  so  then  Nanabushu  set  to  work  painting  the  King 
fisher.  When  he  was  done  with  him,  "Now  look  at  your 
self,  Kingfisher,"  he  said  to  him. 

It  was  true  that  when  he  looked  at  himself,  really  proud 
was  the  Kingfisher. 

"And  this  is  the  way  you  shall  look  till  the  end  of  the 
world,"  said  Nanabushu.  Thereupon  Nanabushu  started 
away,  down  the  stream  he  went.  And  when  a  short  way 
he  was  come,  sure  enough,  he  beheld  a  lake.  What 
should  he  do  but  build  a  raft,  and  very  large  he  made  it. 
When  he  had  finished  it,  he  then  got  aboard  (and)  went 
over  to  yonder  sandy  island.  What  should  he  do  but  go 
ashore  upon  yonder  sandy  beach.  Lo,  living  beings  left 
the  signs  of  their  footprints,  all  kinds  of  living  creatures 
left  the  marks  of  their  tracks.  Thereupon  then  back  on 
his  raft  he  went,  in  a  certain  place  he  hid  away  his  float. 
Thereupon  he  set  to  work  making  his  bow  and  his  arrow; 
he  also  fixed  what  he  was  to  have  for  a  point,  his  claw 
he  used  for  the  point.  When  all  his  work  was  entirely 
done,  by  that  time  it  was  night.  Thereupon,  when  it  was 
day,  Nanabushu  spoke,  saying:  "Now,  let  there  be  a  calm 
throughout  the  whole  day,  and  may  there  be  a  very  clear 
sky!"  Nanabushu  then,  in  this  place  but  towards  the 
woods,  became  a  poplar.  When  high  the  sun  was  risen, 
he  beheld  moving  circles  upon  the  water  of  the  lake. 
First  a  toad  came  up  to  the  surface,  and  then  the  various 
manitous,  every  living  being  then  came  forth  from  the 
water  out  upon  that  island  of  sand.  And  as  fast  as  some 
of  them  came,  they  went  to  sleep. 

"Please    be    careful,"    said    the   Bear.      "It  surely  seems 

17 — PUBL.    AMER.   ETHN.    SOC.    VOL.    VII. 


258 

kuca'  Nanabucu  klganawabamigunan,  nintinandam.    Aman- 
tcisana  ka/r'kitogwan   'asa/u  kitogimaminan." 

Inabit  Nanabucu,  panagu  kawasatigusanik.     Ningutingsa' 
pamagu   nawagam  wantcimoskamunit ;  kunigimn,  micibicln! 
5   Gaga't    minditowan,    pinabiwan,   madwaglgitowan :    "Nana 
bucu  awati  kanlbawit,  asatlsagunk  krrcinagiru*." 


Anintigu  madwagigitowa8:  "Kaya't  ayaban  'aca/u  asatisag." 

"Kawm,  mlgu  yasa/u  ka'i'cinagwa'U't." 

Anintidac    i'kitowap;  :    "Pa'katciofananta  manitowit  ta'i'ci- 

•  •  o  o 

10  nagirir   naska  guca7,   miciginabi'k,  awititibina'kwablga11." 

Kaga't    pimadcawan    kinabigon.      Cigwasa7    udodisigon, 

mlsa7  ajikaskabigi'tanit  anigu'k.    Anlc  kibanamu  Nanabucu. 

Kwa'tcigu  wa'pagitanamut,  acra/nawantciganit.     Aniglgito- 

wan  :      "Mi'tig     laca/u  !       Anm     kagri'cinagusit     Nanabucu 

1  5   kayawit  ?" 


7    kawln    tabwa'a'ndanzi    'asa/u    ugima.      "Taga,   gin 
ma'kwa,  awibasagubic.      Ml  guca  au  Nanabucu." 

Cigwa   pi'a'yawan  Ini/u  ki^cima'kwan.      Cigwasa  udotisi- 
gon,  ajibasagubinigut.     Wibagu  uponi'i'gon,  anijimadcanit. 
20   "Amn    kaglcinagwak    Nanabucu    kayawit?  -    -   Mri-u    ici'a*- 
gwa'tan." 


Kaga't    pimi'a'gwa'tavvan.      A'pidci   nawayaT   kawicimo- 
wan.     Nanabucu    ajikanawabamat,    kayabi'ku  wandcimaya- 
wi'kwaninit.    "Wrkagasa  a'pitci  tawiposangwami,  ka'kinagu 
25   kaya  'isi/u  udockinawama8  tawiposangwamiwa8." 


259 

that  by  Nanabushu  are  we  being  observed,  thus  do  I  feel. 
(I  am)  curious  to  know  what  our  chief  may  have  to  say." 

While  Nanabushu  was  looking,  everywhere  was  there 
splashing  of  water.  By  and  by  all  of  a  sudden  far  out 
upon  the  water  something  came  up  to  the  surface;  behold, 
(it  was  the)  Big  Lynx!  Truly  big  was  he,  hitherward  he 
looked  as  he  came.  He  could  be  heard  saying:  "Nana 
bushu  is  the  one  standing  yonder,  the  form  of  a  poplar 
has  he  taken." 

And  some  could  be  heard  saying:  "Long  since  has 
that  poplar  been  there." 

"No,  it  is  really  he  who  has  taken  on  its  form." 

And  some  said:  "He  is  not  so  powerful  a  manitou  as 
to  take  on  such  a  form.  Why,  Big  Serpent,  do  you  go 
coil  round  about  him." 

Truly  hitherward  came  the  Big  Serpent.  When  (Nana 
bushu)  was  reached,  then  did  (the  Serpent)  squeeze  him 
tight.  Of  course  Nanabushu  held  in  his  breath.  Just  as 
he  was  about  to  breathe,  then  the  Serpent  thought  it  a 
fruitless  task.  Away  he  went,  saying:  "A  tree  that!  How 
is  it  possible  for  Nanabushu  to  become  such  a  thing?" 

But  the  chief  did  not  believe  (what  the  Serpent  said). 
"I  say,  you,  O  Bear!  go  claw  him.  It  surely  is  Nanabushu." 

Then  hither  came  the  Great  Bear.  When  (Nanabushu) 
was  reached,  he  was  clawed  by  it.  And  in  a  little  while 
he  was  let  alone,  then  away  started  (the  Bear).  "How  is 
it  possible  for  Nanabushu  to  become  so?  —  Therefore 
come  you  out  of  the  water." 

Truly  on  out  of  the  water  it  came.  In  their  very  midst 
it  lay  down  to  sleep.  As  Nanabushu  was  watching  it, 
every  once  in  a  while  it  would  lift  up  its  head  to  look 
around.  "Would  that  it  might  fall  into  deep  sleep,  and 
that  all  its  youths  might  sleep  soundly  too !"  l 

1   Willed  by  Nanabushu. 


260 

Kaga't  ka'kina  nibawa8. 

Cigwasa'    Nanabucu  nayap  anicinabaw1,   ajiicat  udanusa- 
ganing.      Niminawa'kru'   ajrcrdoti'tank  rrma  antacinibanit. 
Ajikabat,  anasawayaT  anitata'ku'kl  'iY11  manido8.    Cigwasa 
5   udodisan  Ini/u  ugiman.      A'pidci  waca'pinit  upimwan. 


Kawin  kanaga  kuckupagisusiwan.  Paba'pinisiwagan ! 
Kayabi  pajik  udaiyan  'isi/u  upikwa'k  ajimamot.  Midac 
i'i'ma  pitclnag  atcina'tacininit,  acipimwat.  A'tawa,  kucku- 
pagisowan.  A'tawa,  ki'tcibawi'tigowanini,  agawagu  ododi- 
10  'tan  iu  udanusagan.  Mlsagu  iu  cigwa  anini'kiblnik  4si/u 
sagaigan  kaya  iu  wadciwan.  A'tawa,  sagisi  Nanabucu. 
Cigwa  ima  pibonlwan  Ini/u  ugickimanisln  ajikanonigut : 
"Nanabucu,  mlsa  iu  iniga'a't  'a8a/u  pamadisi'pan  crcrma 
a'king." 


15  'Panagu  kawanataganit,  anode  awlya.  Kwa'tcigu  na'ki- 
binit  'isi/u  mi'tigo8,  mi'a-'pl  acinogimocka'a-ninik.  Kunigimn, 
nayap  anrrska'tani. 

"E'e'e^,"  udigon  ugickimanisln,  "Nanabucu  kawln  kinisasl 
ugimamicipicl !" 

32.  NANABUSHU  SLAYS  TOAD- WOMAN,  THE  HEALER 
OF  THE  MANITOUS. 

20  Misax  nayap  a'kublyanigiban  kra*'kublyani'k.  Aba'pic 
nayap  ka'a-'kublyanik,  mlsa7  cigwa  wawanigu  udonabandan 
wa'tat.  Midac  i'i'ma  wa'U'ntclt  48i/u  tayoc  wlnantuna'i'gat. 


26l 

Sure  enough,  all  went  to  sleep. 

In  a  while  Nanabushu  became  a  human  being  again. 
Then  he  went  over  to  his  raft ;  he  poled  it  along  as  he 
went  over  to  where  they  were  asleep.  When  he  went 
ashore,  in  among  the  manitous  he  stepped  as  he  went 
along.  Presently  he  came  to  where  the  chief  was.  Squarely 
in  the  side  he  shot  him. 

No  surprise  whatever  did  (the  manitou)  display.  Too 
bad  (for  him) !  He  had  yet  one  other  arrow,  which  he 
took.  And  so  there,  where  (the  manitou)  then  was  casting 
a  shadow,  was  where  he  shot  him.  Behold,  then  was  (the 
manitou)  startled  with  surprise.  Oh !  but  there  was  a 
mighty  rushing  of  water,  and  barely  did  he  reach  his  raft. 
Thereupon  then  under  water  went  lake  and  mountain,  one 
after  the  other.  Oh,  afraid  was  Nanabushu !  Then  yonder 
where  he  was,  alighted  the  Kingfisher  by  whom  he  was 
addressed:  "Nanabushu,  therefore  now  have  you  done 
injury  to  them  that  have  been  living  upon  this  earth." 

Oh,  everywhere  were  they  swimming  about,  beings  of 
every  sort !  And  as  the  trees  were  about  to  disappear 
under  the  flood,  then  was  when  the  water  ceased  rising. 
Lo,  the  water  receded,  leaving  (the  earth)  as  dry  as  before. 

"Well,  now,"  he  was  told  by  the  Kingfisher,  " Nana 
bushu,  you  did  not  kill  the  chief  of  the  big  lynxes!" 

32.   NANABUSHU  SLAYS  TOAD- WOMAN,  THE  HEALER 

OF    THE    MANITOUS.1 

Thereupon  back  to  its  former  depth  did  the  water 
recede.  When  the  water  got  to  where  it  was  before,  he 
accordingly  then  with  care  selected  a  place  where  he 
would  have  his  lodge.  And  so  from  there  he  intended 
yet  to  seek  (for  his  nephew).  And  so  while  wandering 

1   For  other  versions  see  Nos.   18  (p.   145)  and  46  (p.   399). 


262 

Mlsa/    kayabi  pabamatamut,   ningutingsa  awlya  onontawan 
piminagamunit : 

"A'kiya'kwag  nimbicinawicin,  nimbicinawicin  sa". 
A'kiya'kwag  nimbicinawicin,  nimbicinawicin  san." 

5  Udini'tawan  awiya  piminagamunit.  Wagunanlwinan 
unanzrtawan.  A'pl  tababamat,  kunigimn,  umaka'kln  pimi- 
yantcikwaskuniwan.  Wlgubln  pamotaminit,  kaya  ciclgwanan 
upimiwinanini  udodananing  ta'kubisowan.  Nlbiwadac  lni/u 
wlgubln  bamondaminit  ajimawinanat.  Aji'U'disat,  anlc, 
10  a'pidci  mindimoyayan.  "No'ko,  amn  wandcinagamoyan  ?" 


"Ka,  Nanabucu  kuca  winantubi'kasu.  Miwaninu  waya- 
bada'kin  ono/Ll  wlgubln  kabimondaman.  Nanabucu  kuca 
win  kacpimwat  Ini/u  ugimamcibicln." 

"No'ku,  anln  win  isi/u  wa'irndcinandobi'kasut  'a5;a/u 
1 5  Nanabucu  ?" 

"Ka,  kawlnac  win  mlgu  iu  ajisagisininik  lici/u  ubikwalk 
asa/u  Nanabucu.  O8o/u  odana  mri'ma  pa'u'ndclyan.  Midac 
ima  ayawa  pimadisi  asa/u  ugimamcibicl." 

"No'kumis!   amn  dac  win  isiu  Wwa  kipiminagamuyan  ?" 

20        "Ka,  kawlnac  win  nlnanantawra/nan  *a8a/u  ugima,  mldac 
iu  ana-a'man  'i^wa  nanandawi'a'g : 

"'A'kia'kwag  nimbicinawicin.' 
"Mlsa  iu  a'pidci  ginin  nimino'tago.      Nagamun  unicicin." 


1   Other    translations    of  the  song  would   be:   "From  the  beginning  of  the  world 
has    the    sound    of   my   voice  been  heard;  From  the  ends  of  the  earth  is  the  sound 


263 

about    weeping,    he    once    heard    somebody    going    along 
singing : 

"From  the  ends  of  the  earth  do  I  come  with  the  sound  of  my  rattles,  sa". 
From  the  ends  of  the  earth  do  I  come  with  the  sound  of  my  rattles,  san."  * 

Such  was  the  way  he  heard  some  one  sing  while  going 
along.  What  should  he  do  but  go  towards  the  sound  of 
the  being.  When  he  came  in  sight  of  the  being,  lo,  (he 
saw  that)  it  was  a  toad  3  leaping  along  from  place  to  place. 
Some  bast  she  bore  upon  her  back,  and  some  rattles  she 
carried  bound  to  her  heels.  Now,  a  good  deal  was  the 
bast  she  carried  on  her  back  when  he  rushed  up  to  her. 
On  coming  up  to  her,  why,  she  was  a  very  old  woman. 
"O  my  grandmother!  for  what  reason  are  you  singing?" 

"Oh,  a  snare  is  really  to  be  laid  for  Nanabushu.  And 
this  bast  which  I  carry  upon  my  back  is  the  thing  to  be 
used  for  the  purpose.  It  was  Nanabushu  who  really  shot 
the  chief  of  the  big  lynxes." 

"  O  my  grandmother !  pray,  why  is  a  snare  to  be  set 
for  Nanabushu?" 

"Oh,  well!  it  is  for  the  arrow  of  Nanabushu,  which  is 
now  sticking  out  of  (the  chief  of  the  big  lynxes).  From 
this  town  yonder  do  I  come.  And  over  there  hardly 
alive  is  the  chief  of  the  big  lynxes." 

"O  my  grandmother!  pray,  what  was  that  you  were 
singing  about?" 

"Oh,  why,  we  are  ministering  to  the  chief;  and  this  is 
what  I  sing  when  I  am  attending  him  : 

"  'From  the  ends  of  the  earth  do  I  come  with  the  sound  of  my  rattles.' 

"It  is  so  much  pleasure  I  impart  when  I  sing.  The  song 
is  fine." 

of   my    coming  heard."     The  second  rendition  is  preferred  to  the  first,  but  the  one 
given  in  the  story  is  preferred  to  all. 

2  The  old  Toad-Woman,  mother  earth. 


"No'ko!   anti  tinunk  namadapiyan  ?" 

"A'pitcigu  mayawickant  mi'ku  ima  andanapiyan.  Iwitac 
ka/rcictcigawat,  abi'ta  kackikibita ;  mldac  iwiti  awasayaT 
cingicink  'a8a/u  nintogimaminan." 

5        "Antidac  win  H'*u  andayan?" 

"Migu  ima  a'kwa'kwag  antayan.  A'pitcigu  agansa  isi/u 
niwlgiwamans.  Kayadac  niciwag  nocisag,  a'pidcigu  papl- 
wiclyowag  kwlwisansag ;  miya'tagu  Igi/u  watigamagwa." 


"No'ko!  anm  win  rru  ka*i*cinawa'a't  Ini/u  Nanabucowan?" 

10  "Ka,  kanawm  ugl'u'da'pinamawan  Ini/u  odocimini.  A'pidci 
Nanabucu  usagi'a'banln  mi/u  udociman.  Mldac  lisi/u  klnis- 
ki'a't,  ka'irndcipimugut." 

"Anfi,    amnguta    win    aci'kawagubanan  au  ugimamcibicm 
ieixwa  mamawagubanan  !ni/u  udocimini?    Kawmsa  win  agansi 
15   manidowisl  'a8a/u   Nanabucu  ajini'kasut." 

Uta'taganabamigon :    "Nyan,  magica  kin   Nanabucu!" 

"Ta'tiwa!     Kawln  mlni'k  ifii/u  kitakaganonigusl  Nanabucu 
awit.      Mawica    kitanlwana*u*k    klcpin    awiyan    Nanabuco. 
No'ko !  taga,   minawa  madclan  kinagamun !      Kawln  gwatc 
20  ningi'kandanzm  isi/u  kinagamun." 

Amc  kayabi : 

"A'kia'kwag  nimbicinawicin,  nimbicinawicin,  sa". 
A'kia'kwag  nimbicinawicin,  nimbicinawicin,  sa"." 

Wagunaniwinan    Nanabucu    uniwana'wan.      uTaga,  awa- 

25   naniwmana     au     matcimindimoyacic."       A'taya,     Nanabucu 

umatcrkawan    'isi/u  pa'kunat,  wawlnga  uba'kunan.      Ka'ki- 


265 

"O  my  grandmother!   at  what  place  do  you  sit?" 

In  the  very  middle  of  the  doorway  is  where  I  always  sit. 
Now,  this  is  what  they  have  done :  a  partition  divides  the 
space  in  two  equal  parts ;  and  so  over  on  the  other  side 
lies  that  chief  of  ours." 

"And  where  is  it  you  dwell?" 

"Why,  yonder  at  the  edge  of  the  forest  do  I  dwell. 
And  very  small  is  that  little  wigwam  of  mine.  And  there 
are  two  of  my  grandchildren,  and  very  tiny  are  the  boys; 
now,  they  are  the  only  ones  with  whom  I  live." 

"O  my  grandmother!  how  was  it  that  (the  chief)  angered 
Nanabushu  ?" 

"Why,  he  actually  took  his  nephew  away  from  him. 
Very  fond  was  Nanabushu  of  his  nephew.  It  was  on  that 
account  (the  chief)  angered  him,  which  was  why  he  was 
shot  (by  Nanabushu)." 

"Now,  pray  why  should  he  be  so  treated  by  the  chief 
of  the  big  lynxes  as  to  be  deprived  of  his  nephew  by 
him?  By  no  means  a  small  manitou  is  he  who  goes  by 
the  name  of  Nanabushu." 

She  lifted  her  head  and  looked  up  at  him:  "Ah,  me! 
perhaps  you  are  Nanabushu  !" 

"  Nonsense !  Not  so  long  as  this  would  you  be  held  in 
conversation  if  it  were  Nanabushu.  Long  ago  would  you 
have  been  clubbed  to  death  if  I  were  Nanabushu.  O  my 
grandmother !  do  start  that  song  of  yours  once  more ! 
Not  exactly  yet  do  I  know  that  song  of  yours." 

So  once  more  : 

"From  the  ends  of  the  earth  do  I  come  with  the  sound  of  my  rattles,  sa". 
From  the  ends  of  the  earth  do  I  come  with  the  sound  of  my  rattles,  sa"." 

What  did  Nanabushu  do  but  club  her  to  death.  "Well, 
what  a  fool  this  wretched  old  woman  (was) !"  Ah !  Nana 
bushu  then  set  to  work  flaying  her,  from  every  part  he 


266 

cipa^kunat,  a'pitci  agacPyi'kasu  Nanabucu.  Wagunamwinan 
ajiplsi'kawat  lni/u  umaka'klwayanan,  wawlnga  udapickawan. 
PangI  oma  upwaning  uga'kikickawan.  Ka'plsi'kawat,  Ini/u 
uclcigwanan  udondanank  uda'kupinan,  kaya  Ini/u  wigupln 
5  udompontanan.  'A,  Nanabucu  ajikwaskwanit  ajimadcra'nk  : 


"A'ki-a/'kwag  nimbicinawicin,  nimbicinawicin,  sa". 
A'ki'a/'kwag  nimbicinawicin,  nimbicinawicin,  sa"." 

A'pitcigu    kiclwa    piminagamut.      Caylgwa    udababandan 

odana.    Aba'pic  a'kwa'kwanig  tagucing,  kaga't  owabandan 

10  wlgiwamans.     "Mima  wmi'i'11  ka'i'tank,"  inandam.     Kumagu 

a'plsinagwatiniwan   Ini/u  wigiwaman.      Amc,   a'pitci  anigu'k 

piminagamu,  nontawa  piminagamut. 


Pajik  ajikikitut:  "A8,  cigwa  mmawa  ko'konan  pitwawitam. 
Mri/>u  cigwa  mmawa  tci'a-wisagaswa'a'k." 

15        Ml  cigwa  ani'U'di'tank  wlgiwamans,  nayagigu  pisaga'a*moc 
kwlwisansa8.      "No'ko,  kitagwicinina  ?" 

"Ayes,    nosisitug,    nintagwicin."      Amciplndigat,    wagitci- 

tclngwan   namadabiwa8  Ci8i/u  osisa8.      Wagunaniwinan  pacig 

Ini/u    osisan    owabamigon    i'i'ma  klka'kikickawat  Ini/u  uma- 

20  ka'klwayanan.      "No'ko,    amn    win    i'i'ma    kri'cinagusiyan  ? 

Anicinaba  wacaga'a/ng  kidicinagus." 


"Ka,  nimbigwa'tagl  icl'kamani'ku  Ini/u  wigupln  wra'ntawa 
pi'kasut  'asa/u  Nanabucu." 

A'pidcisa  ki'tci  anigu'k  naganun.  Mlsa  gaga't  ka'prijisa- 


267 

removed  the  skin.  After  he  had  finished  flaying  her,  very 
small  then  Nanabushu  made  himself.  What  should  he  do 
but  get  into  the  toad-skin  to  wear  it,  in  every  respect 
did  he  fit  into  it.  Slightly  here  on  the  hip  he  tore  it. 
After  he  had  got  into  it,  then  he  bound  the  rattles  to 
his  heels,  and  put  the  bast  upon  his  back.  Ah  !  as  Nana 
bushu  went  leaping  along,  he  then  began  to  sing: 

"From  the  ends  of  the  earth  do  I  come  with  the  sound  of  my  rattles,  sa". 
From  the  ends  of  the  earth  do  I  come  with  the  sound  of  my  rattles,  sa"." 

And  very  loud  was  the  sound  of  his  voice  as  he  went 
singing.  In  a  while  was  he  come  in  sight  of  the  town. 
When  he  was  come  at  the  edge  of  the  forest,  sure  enough, 
he  saw  a  small  wigwam.  "This  must  be  what  she  spoke 
of,"  he  thought.  Farther  on  was  a  view  of  the  wigwams. 
Now,  ever  so  loud  he  sang  as  he  went ;  he  was  heard  as 
he  went  singing  along. 

One  then  spoke  up:  "Yea,  now  once  again  comes  the 
sound  of  our  dear  grandmother  singing.  Therefore  now 
again  should  you  invite  her  to  the  gathering  to  smoke." 

Then  presently,  as  he  was  about  to  arrive  at  the  little 
wigwam,  but  before  he  got  there,  out  came  the  boys. 
"O  my  grandmother!  have  you  come  home?" 

"Yes,  my  grandchildren,  I  am  come  home."  When  in 
she  entered,  then  on  her  lap  sat  her  grandchildren.  What 
should  happen  to  him l  but  to  be  seen  by  one  of  his 
grandchildren  at  the  place  where  he  had  torn  open  the 
toad-skin.  "O  my  grandmother!  why  do  you  look  that 
way  there?  Like  the  skin  of  a  human  being  is  the  way 
you  look  there." 

"Oh,  I  wore  it  through  while  at  work  on  the  bast  (to 
be  used  for  a  snare)  that  is  to  be  laid  for  Nanabushu." 

As  loud  as  she  could  she  sang.     Thereupon  truly  was 

1  Gender  is  confused  here,  but  it  is  given  as  in  the  text. 


268 

gaswa'i'nt,  midac  ka'ijimadcat.  Cigwa  ko'konan  ubacwa- 
bandan  48i/u  wlgiwam.  A'tawa,  ckwantank  anln  ka/rcinank 
udocimiwayanan  kipickwantaigawan.  Mlgu  iu  wipitani 
acigigisininik.  A;tiwa  Nanabucu !  mlgu  iu  acislgisanik  Ini/u 
5  usklcigon.  Kagagu  ajikistcimawit,  wawicwm  alpl  anipa- 
'kintanank.  Panagu  a'pitci  mockinawa8  wananatawi*i'wanit. 
Ickwantank  aciwunapit.  Kagalt  owabandan  48i/u  kackilki- 
pitanik,  midac  iwiti  antanwawitaminit  !ni/u  ugiman  mamat- 
wanit.  Cigwasa7  madci'tawa8  nanatawrrwanit.  Mlsa  iu 
10  ajipacitcita'ku'kiwat  iwiti  antanwawitaminit  lni/u  mwa'kunanit. 
Amc  pa'tanlnowa8. 


Cigwasa7  pacunagwatini  kaya  win  48i/u  tcimadci'tad,  cigwa 
kaya  win  wlnanantawrrwa.  A'taya,  Nanabucu  ajimadci'tat, 
umatciwabinan  Ini/u  clclgwanan,  a'pidci  anigu'k  nagamu  : 

I  5  "A'ki-a/'kwag  nimpicinawicin  nimbicinawicin,  sa". 

A'ki'a''kwag  nimpicinawicin  nimbicinawicin,  sa"." 

Ina'a'm.  Caylgwa  pasigwl  ajiicat  ugimamicipicln.  A'tawa, 
a'p!  ani'o'nabrtawat,  wantcidagu  waca'pmit  Ii8ixwa  ubikwalk 
klsaga'kusinini.  Mlgu  iu  pagitanamunit,  ana'kuskanik. 
20  Wawanigu  udota'pinan  isi/u  ubikwa'k  acicicigwanawat. 
A'ta7,  Nanabucu  ajipasiguntcisat,  acika'kikiwabickawat  Ini/u 
umaka'klwayanan,  mlgu  ima  wantcipapicigunint.  "  'A'a'eM 
mlsa  iu  piya'pitcinanat  Ca8a/u  Nanabucu  mi/u  kitogimami- 


nanin." 


269 

she  invited  to  the  assembly  to  smoke.  Accordingly  then 
she  went.  Presently  our  grandmother  was  approaching 
nigh  to  the  wigwam.  Oh,  in  the  doorway  what  should 
he  l  behold  but  the  skin  of  his  nephew  then  being  used 
for  a  flap  over  the  entry-way.  And  there  still  were  left 
upon  it  some  of  the  teeth  (of  his  nephew).  Sorrowful 
Nanabushu !  then  did  tears  pour  from  his  eyes.  And 
almost  did  he  weep  aloud,  especially  when  opened  the 
flap  on  his  way  in.  Throughout  every  part  was  the  space 
crowded  with  them  who  were  to  heal.  By  the  doorway 
he  sat  down.  Sure  enough,  he  saw  that  there  was  a 
partition,  and  it  was  over  beyond  he  could  hear  the  sound 
of  the  chief  as  he  groaned  in  pain.  Already  began  they 
who  were  to  do  the  healing.  Thereupon  (the  throng) 
stepped  over  to  the  place  where  they  heard  the  sound  of 
him  who  was  suffering.  Of  course  they  were  many. 

Now  the  time  drew  nigh  for  him  also  to  begin,  now 
he  too  was  about  to  begin  healing.  Well,  when  Nana 
bushu  began,  he  began  wielding  the  rattles  with  a  swing, 
very  loud  he  sang : 

"From  the  ends  of  the  earth  do  I  come  with  the  sound  of  my  rattles,  san. 
From  the  ends  of  the  earth  do  I  come  with  the  sound  of  my  rattles,  san." 

(Thus)  he  sang.  Presently  up  he  rose  to  his  feet  when 
he  went  over  to  the  chief  of  the  big  lynxes.  Ah,  when 
he  went  over  to  sit  beside  him,  square  in  his  side  was 
the  arrow  sticking  out.  Accordingly,  when  he  breathed, 
then  to  and  fro  moved  the  arrow.  Now  with  care  (Nana 
bushu)  seized  the  arrow,  which  he  worked  back  and  forth 
into  him.  Ah !  when  Nanabushu  sprang  to  his  feet,  he 
thus  tore  up  that  toad-skin  of  his,  whereupon  they  tried 
in  vain  to  catch  him  there.  "Alas!  it  was  to  kill  this 
chief  of  ours  that  Nanabushu  came." 

1   Gender  is  confused  here,  but  it  is  given  as  in  the  text. 


270 

Migu  ima  anro'ntcipa'kibinat  ini/u  udocimiwayanan. 
A'tawa,  mlgu  iu  pa/a^kublnik  pimoskaaninik,  anunatciba'r- 
wat  48i/u  udanusagan.  A'tawa,  mintcimigu  cigwa'  udanu- 
pacwantan,  cayigwasa  mldac  a'ta  ustigwan  anisagibatot. 
5  Caylgwa  udababandan,  agawa  udodi'tan ;  mldac  aciposit 
i9i/u  udanusagan,  a'tawa  Nanabucu,  skwatci  na'kiblni'k 
watciwan.  A'ta/,  ki'tcikabaya*!'  kayabi  klmoskaanini.  E1, 
anicagu  kawanataganit  'i8i/u  awaslya8  kaya  igi/u  pabamisanit. 
Anintigu  udanaposi'a'8  paplwicri'nit ;  ivvidac  win  mamandi- 
10  dunit  anicagu  sa'ki'kwagumowa8.  Po'tcidac  migu  iu  kinta- 
blckaminit  48i/u  utclman.  "Misa7  kawln  wi'ka  minawa 
a'ki'kang  klgataiyaslmin,"  inandamog. 


aMimawmi-i'u  kaga't  pata'tcigayan,"  inandam.  Oganona8 
awaslya8:  "A'tawa  mlsa  iu  klwanrkayan  i8i/u  a'ki.  Ambagic 
15  pang!  pra-yayamban  Ii8i/u  alki !  Ambasa,  kawm  ina  awlya 
odabltosm  48i/u  a'ki?  Klcpin  cacagowisiyag  ml  iu  ga'kina 
tciniboyank.  Minotc  mini'k  na'tagogiyag,  nantawabanda- 
mulk  i8i/u  a'ki.  Kagu7  win  mamawmu'kagun,  aiya'kowatc 
kigamadcam." 

20        Mldac  'asa/u  mang  ni'tam  kanonint :   "Taga",  kin,  ni'tam 
nantawabandan   'i8i/u  a'ki.      Ayangwamisin  wlpldon." 


"Anlc,   mlnotcsa,"  i'kito   'asa/u  mank.     A'ta,  'a8a/u  mank 

nontagusl:    "Aa,   wlwiwi'!"     A'ta',   a'pa'n  kwaglt.     A'tawa, 

wl'kagu     klyaboska'a-guntcisawan.       A'tawa     acimangwan 

25   wada'pinat.      Nanabucu  ka/u'da'pinat,  acibabwatanat,  mlsa7 

nayap  krpimadisinit.      Ajikanonat :    "Anln,   kawln  ina  kigl- 


And  then  from  its  place  he  tore  off  his  nephew's  skin 
as  he  went.  Oh,  thereupon,  as  the  flood  came,  as  the 
water  rose,  then  he  fled,  seeking  to  find  his  raft.  Oh, 
at  the  very  moment  when  he  felt  he  was  getting  near  to 
it,  then  already  was  he  going  along  with  only  his  head 
out  of  the  water.  Presently  he  came  in  sight  of  it,  barely 
did  he  get  to  it ;  and  when  he  got  aboard  his  raft,  poor 
Nanabushu  (saw  that)  now  under  water  were  the  mountains. 
Why,  for  a  great  while  did  the  water  rise.  Well,  to  swim 
aimlessly  about  was  all  that  the  animal-folk  and  the  beings 
of  the  air  could  do.  Now,  some  that  were  tiny  he  tried 
to  put  aboard ;  and  those  that  were  big  hung  to  (the  raft) 
by  their  chins.  Yet,  for  all  that,  his  float  was  weighed 
down  with  its  burden.  "Therefore  never  again  shall  we 
be  upon  land,"  they  thought. 

"Perhaps  it  is  true  that  I  have  done  a  wrong  (which 
may  never  be  repaired),"  he  thought.  He  spoke  to  the 
animal-kind,  saying:  "Pity  it  is  that  I  forgot  (to  fetch  along) 
some  earth.  Would  that  I  might  have  brought  a  little ! 
Now,  is  there  no  one  able  to  fetch  some  earth?  If  you 
'continue  passive,  then  shall  we  all  die.  Even  so,  do  you, 
as  many  as  are  good  at  diving,  go  seek  for  some  earth. 
Do  not  all  go  together,  one  after  the  other  shall  you  go." 

Accordingly  the  Loon  was  the  first  to  be  addressed : 
"I  say,  you,  do  you  first  go  seek  for  some  earth.  Take 
care  that  you  fetch  it." 

"Well,  I  will  try,"  said  the  Loon.  Lo,  a  cry  the  Loon 
was  heard  to  give:  "A,  wlwlwi!"  Oh,  then  down  he 
dived  into  the  water.  Why,  it  was  a  long  time  before 
he  came  back  up  to  the  surface  of  the  water.  It  was  a 
poor  dead  loon  (Nanabushu)  then  picked  up.  After  Nana 
bushu  had  picked  him  up,  he  then  breathed  upon  him, 
whereat  back  to  life  he  came.  Then  (Nanabushu)  spoke 
to  him,  saying:  "How  now?  Did  you  not  come  in  sight  of 


272 

tababandanzin  'isi/u  a'ki?"    Ajikarionigut  Nanabucu:  "Kawin 
kanaga  ningltababandazln,   mi  a'p!  ka-rciwanantaman." 

A'pitci  sagisi  Nanabucu.  "Ambasa,  gin  ami'k,  taga  kin. 
Pamagu  nipuyan  mri/>u  tcra/nacl'taman.  Kagu'  win  magwa 
5  pimatisiyan  pigiwa'kan." 

A'taiya,  misa7  kaya  win  a'kawa  nondagusit  ami'k. 
A'pan  kwaglt  lafia/u  ami'k.  A'tawa!  pabima'kwaciwat  laca/u 
ami'k,  mlgu  iu  cigwa  wanantank ;  anutababamat  48i/u  mi- 
'tigos,  misa'  ka'i'ciwanantank. 

10  Mlsa7  Nanabucu,  aya'kawabit.  A'tawa!  ningutingigu 
ki'u'ndcaboska'a'gun  tcisawan  mlnawa  udagwaciman  Ini/u 
ami'kwan  utclmaning.  "A'tawa,  acimadcl,  mlsax  kinisaba- 
wat  niclmisa!"  Mlsa  minawa  ka'i'jipabwatanat,  misa/  nayap 
krpimadisinit.  Ajikanonat :  "Anm  ka'i'ciwabisiyan  ?" 


15        "A'tawa,   mlgu  iciu  tababamagwa  mi'tigog,  mi  a'pi  ka'i*- 
ciwanantaman." 

"Amc  na,  misa  gaga't  nibuyank.  Intawa  mri/<u  ka'kina 
na'tagoglyak  icimamawlnuyu'k.  Iwitac  ka'i'cictcigayak, 
pamagu  nibuyak  klgayanicl'tam." 


20  A'taiya,  anic  ga'kina  mini'k  na'tagoglwat  acigoglwat. 
Anic  inandam  nigik  tcibltot  'isi/u  a'ki.  Cigwa  a'kawa  na- 
watcimowag,  a'pa/n  kwaginit,  a'taiya,  tci'a'yanagotcininit. 
Mini'k  pabima'kwaciwawat,  anintigu  tcibwadababandamowat 
mri''u  ajiwanantamowat.  Aninti  dac  kaya  abi'tawa'tig 

25  mi'tigunk  mri'-u  ajiwanantamowat;  misa7  kawin  kanaga 
pangi  awlya  ubldosln  'i9i/u  a'ki.  Anicaya'tagu,  kawanagun- 


273 

the  earth?"  Then  was  Nanabushu  told:  "Not  even  did 
I  come  in  sight  of  it,  for  when  (on  the  way  down)  did  I 
become  insensible." 

Very  much  afraid  became  Nanabushu.  "Now,  you, 
Beaver,  do  you  (go).  Not  till  you  are  dead  shall  you 
give  up.  Do  not  return  as  long  as  you  are  alive." 

Lo,  therefore  the  Beaver  too,  before  (he  went),  was  heard 
giving  forth  a  cry.  Then  down  dived  the  Beaver.  Alas! 
as  down  through  the  water  the  Beaver  was  going,  then 
was  when  he  became  unconscious ;  (it  was  when)  he  tried 
in  vain  to  get  sight  of  the  trees  that  he  lost  his  wits. 

And  now  Nanabushu  was  keeping  watch.  Alas!  by  and 
by  up  to  the  surface  he  came,  and  he  drew  the  Beaver  up 
into  his  canoe.  "Ah,  what  a  pity,  now  that  drowned  is 
my  little  brother!"  And  so  again,  when  he  had  breathed 
upon  him,  then  accordingly,  as  before,  (the  Beaver)  came 
back  to  life.  Then  he  spoke  to  him,  saying:  "How  did 
you  fare  ?" 

"Why,  just  as  I  was  coming  into  view  of  the  trees, 
then  did  I  become  insensible." 

"Well,  then,  it  is  certain  that  now  we  shall  die.  There 
fore  then  do  all  you  that  are  good  at  diving  go  hence 
together.  And  this  is  what  you  shall  do,  not  till  you  are 
dead  shall  you  give  up." 

Behold,  naturally,  all  that  were  good  at  diving  then 
dived  into  the  water.  Now  the  Otter  thought  that  he 
would  fetch  the  earth.  So  before  starting  they  (all) 
whooped,  then  down  they  dived,  (being  gone)  oh,  till  they 
(were  drowned  and)  came  floating  to  the  surface.  Of  as 
many  as  went  into  the  water,  some  became  unconscious 
before  they  got  sight  of  the  earth.  And  now  some  were 
halfway  down  the  trees  when  they  then  lost  their  wits ; 
whereupon  not  even  a  small  bit  of  earth  did  any  one 
fetch.  Yea,  of  a  truth,  afloat  on  the  water  were  all  those 

1 8 — PUBL.    AMER.    ETHN.    SOC.    VOL.    VII. 


274 

tcininit  mini'k  anugl  kogmit.  Ajra'gwabiginat,  mlnawa 
ajibabwadanat,  mlsa'  nayab  ajipimadisinit  ka'kina.  Mldac 
lisi'u  anigagwatcimat :  "Awanan  ka'pacwabandank  4ci/u  a'ki?" 

Nigikidac  klgito :    "Nmsa/  nlntanugipacwabandan." 

5        "Amnigu  wa'pl?" 

"Kawm   win  abi'tawa'tig  nawatc  paci/  ningrirsabandan 
48i/u  a'ki." 

"Tagax,  mlnawa,  nigig." 

Mlsa  ora^a't  ajikoglt,  pabima'kwaciwat :  tcibwag'ua'kwana- 

OOjO'-T  O 

10  bawat,  mri''"  cigwa  tababandank  Ci8i/u  a'ki  mindci  migu 
pacwabandank,  aciwanantank.  A'tawa!  Nanabucu  untci'a'- 
boska'a'guntcisawan.  "E8,  mlsa7  gaga't  niboyank."  Intawa 
nayap  udoda'pinan.  Babwadanat  ajigagwatcima :  "Anm 
ka'ijiwabisiyan  ?" 


15        "Misax  undcita  kawm  nindakacki'tosm  nm  tcibidoyamban." 

A'tawa  Nanabucu !  mlsa  gaga't  sagisit.  Tiwa,  uglmi- 
'kwaniman  lni/u  wajackwan.  "Taga',  km.  Minotc,  wa- 
jack,  kogln." 

"Anic,  mlnotc  mano  kaya  mn  ninganisabawa." 
20        "  lAla/u,  wajVck,  aiyangwamisin." 


Ta,  waja^k  osou  odompinan ;  cayigwa,  kwatcak !  inwawa- 
gamicinon.  A'tax!  waja^k  pabima'kwaciwat,  ningutingigu 
utababama8  mi'tigo8.  Kawm  anawi  a'pidci  a'kwanabawasl. 
Cigwa  abi'tawatig  mi'tigunk  ododi'tan ;  mlgux  cigwax  wa- 
25  nantank  tagwicing  iwiti  asking.  Ajikana'kantank  'i8i/u  a'ki", 
kaya  anint  unintclnk  ugani'kibi'ton.  Mri'ma  utcitcalkank 


275 

who  had  tried  to  dive.  When  he  drew  them  out  of  the 
water,  again  he  breathed  upon  them,  whereupon  back  to 
life  they  all  came.  And  then  he  asked  of  them,  one  after 
another:  "Who  was  it  that  got  a  near  view  of  the  earth?" 

And  the  Otter  spoke  up:  "I  myself  tried  to  get  within 
easy  view  of  it,  but  without  success." 

"And  how  close?" 

"Why  I  was  more  than  halfway  down  the  trees  when 
I  saw  the  earth." 

"I  say,  once  more,  Otter." 

Whereupon  truly  down  he  dived,  down  into  the  water 
he  went ;  and  before  he  was  out  of  breath,  then  he  came 
in  sight  of  the  earth.  And  the  moment  that  he  got  within 
easy  reach  of  it,  then  he  became  insensible.  Alas !  Nana- 
bushu  (saw)  him  come  floating  on  the  water.  "Oh,  there 
fore  certainly  now  shall  we  die !"  Consequently,  just  as 
before,  he  took  (the  Otter)  up.  Breathing  upon  him,  he 
then  asked  of  him  :  "  How  did  you  fare  ?" 

"Why,  it  seemed  fated  for  me  not  to  be  able  to  fetch 
home  (some  earth)." 

Poor  Nanabushu !  thereupon  truly  was  he  scared.  Behold, 
he  remembered  the  Muskrat.  "  Now  you,  despite  our 
failure,  Muskrat,  do  you  dive  into  the  water." 

"Well,  anyhow,   I   will  try;  but  I  too  shall  drown." 

"Good,  Muskrat,  do  all  you  can." 

Ay!  the  Muskrat  lifted  his  tail;  then  "kwatcak!"1  was 
the  sound  he  made  as  he  dived  into  the  water.  Ah !  as 
the  Muskrat  was  on  his  way  through  the  water,  he  by 
and  by  came  in  sight  of  the  trees.  Not  so  very  much 
out  of  breath  was  he  for  all  that.  In  a  while  halfway 
down  the  trees  was  he  come ;  and  when  he  got  to  the 
earth,  he  then  became  insensible.  When  he  took  some 
earth  in  his  mouth,  he  also  took  up  some  in  his  paws. 

1  The  sound  of  the  water  as  he  went  down. 


276 

ajitcanga'kuskanig  'i9i/u  usou  kaya  wlnaga'tig.  Magwagu 
Nanabucu  a'kawabamat,  a/tiwa  ningutingigu  undcra/bo- 
cka'a'gundcisawan  wantcitogu  kapikwa'kwataguntcminitigu. 
Mlnotc  ododa'pinan  Nanabucu.  Anica  totank,  uba'ka'kin- 
5  intclbinan.  .A'tawa,  a'ki  uglkaska'kunintcantamini.  Mlnawa 
acawinintc  mlnasab,  a'ki  uduntcimi'kamawan.  Ima  udcit- 
ca'kayanink  udici'a-ntawabandamawan,  kayabi  a'ki  umi- 
^kwunamawan  ;  kaya  iwiti  pindcikuna/11  nawatc  nlbiwa  udon- 
tcimi'kamawan.  Mlsa  ajibabwadanat  mi'i*u  mlnawa  ka'iji- 
10  pimadisinit. 


Acibasank  'isi/u  alki,  "Mlsa  (i8i/u  kaga  tcigici'toyan  4ci/u 
a'ki."  Nanabucu  acibodatank,  kunigimn !  minisans  kra*- 
gwantani.  Mig^  aca  wl'pimi-a'gwa'tanit  lici/u  manidowanca6, 
ajikanowat :  "Ba'ka,  pama  nawatc  mistcag  agwa'ta'kag." 


15  Mmawa  ajipodadank,  kistciminis  kra-gwantani.  Mldac 
ima  kistciba'tanmatinink  ka'ijibotatank,  mlsa  cigwa  pima- 
dislwaganimunit  'ici/u  manitowanca8.  Mlnawa  madci'ta 
pabwatatank  48i/u  a'ki.  Ajiganonat  Ini/u  kaclsanit  ka'ka- 
'kwan :  "Taga,  klwitasan  o'O'  a'ki  amantc  anigu'kwagwan 

20  oo/u  akki." 

Gaga't    ajimadcat    ka'ka'k.      Kumagu  kla'pi'tanti,   cigwa 
tagwicinon  ajikanonigut.      "Kawln  a'pidci  mi'tasinon." 


Mmawa      acipodadank,      kabaya*!'      taci'tababwadadank. 
Mlnawa    oganonan    Ini/u    kagakiwan :    "Taga,    km    kagagi, 
25   wlki'kadan  amantc  aniku'kwagwan  ici/u  a'ki." 


277 

Then  there  between  his  groins  he  flung  his  tail  and  his 
stiffened  penis.  Now,  while  Nanabushu  was  watching  for 
him,  why,  by  and  by  (he  saw)  the  poor  creature  floating 
on  the  water  (looking)  quite  (like)  a  ball  that  was  carried 
on  the  flood.  Even  so  Nanabushu  reached  down  and 
picked  him  up.  Doing  it  in  play,  he  opened  out  (the 
Muskrat's)  paws.  Why,  (the  Muskrat)  was  holding  fast  to 
some  earth  in  his  clinched  paw.  Likewise  in  the  other 
paw,  in  just  the  same  way,  he  found  him  with  some  earth. 
There  in  his  groins  he  sought  to  find  him  with  it,  even 
more  earth  he  found  upon  him  ;  and  there  in  his  throat 
too  he  found  him  with  much  more.  And  so  when  he 
breathed  upon  him,  he  then  came  back  to  life. 

When  he  had  dried  the  earth  (he  found  on  the  Muskrat), 
"Therefore  now  am  I  about  to  create  the  earth."  When 
Nanabushu  blew  his  breath  upon  it,  behold !  a  small  island 
floated  on  the  water.  Accordingly  afterwards  the  small 
animal-folk  were  eager  to  go  out  upon  it,  when  he  then 
spoke  to  them,  saying:  "Wait!  not  till  it  is  larger  may 
you  go  out  upon  it." 

When  again  he  blew  his  breath  upon  it,  a  great  island 
was  floating  on  the  water.  And  so  upon  the  place  where 
he  had  blown  his  breath  there  was  much  earth,  whereupon 
then  began  the  little  animal-kind  to  feel  themselves  secure. 
Once  more  he  began  breathing  upon  the  earth.  Then  he 
spoke  to  the  swift-flying  Bird-Hawk,  saying:  "Now  fly  you 
round  about  this  earth  and  see  how  large  this  earth  is." 

Sure  enough,  away  went  the  Bird-Hawk.  For  some  time 
was  he  gone,  in  a  while  he  came  home.  Then  was  (Nana 
bushu)  told  by  him,  "Not  so  very  large  is  (the  earth.)" 

When  again  (Nanabushu)  breathed  upon  it,  for  a  long 
while  was  he  busy  breathing  upon  it.  Next  he  spoke  to 
the  Raven,  saying:  "Now,  you,  Raven,  do  you  find  out  how 
big  this  earth  is." 


278 

Kaga't  ajimadcat  lasa/u  kagagi.  Amantcltug  tasuglsis 
anantit  kagagi;  wl'ka  tagwicin.  Cigwa  tibatcimu :  "Kawm 
ninglmilkanzm  amantc  aniku'kwagwan  Io8o/u  a'ki,  migu  iu 
ka/rcindntaklwayan." 

5  Nanabucu  dac  ajiganonat  Ini/u  kagagiwan :  "Ambasa, 
tcipiciganimoyan  klga'rcrrn.  Anln  i*i/>u  ka'i'cipicigani- 
moyan  ?" 

"Nanabucu,  'i^wa  klmicakwa'k  ka'i'cinagwa'k  klyoca- 
wackwag,  ml7*!*11  ambagic  ici'i'yan." 

10  Misax  gaga't  Nanabucu  kro'cawaskunat.  Kagagidac 
ka'i'cinagusit  mri/<u  mi/u  Nanabucowan. 

SERIES  III.     Nos.  33-38. 
33.    NANABUSHU  FEIGNS  DEATH  TO  MARRY  HIS  SISTER. 

Amc,  micigwa  alndawag,  Nanabucu  uclmayan  widigaman. 
Mlsax  piboniciwad  rrma,  ningudingigu  inantam  Nanabucu  : 
"Amantcigic  ka-i'cictcigawabanan  4si/u  misawanimak  lasa/u 

15  nicima  'i€i/u  tciwldigamagiban !"  Mlsa  cigwa  kinantami- 
'kwantank,  misa7  aci'a/'kusfkasut.  Mlsa  kaga't  uga'tinigon 
a'pidci.  Kaga'tisa  ugagwa'tagian  Ini/u  uclmayan,  mlsa7 
cigwa:  "Kuniga  migu*i>u  kaga't  tcinibugwan  wasa/u  nisayan!" 
inandam  'asa/u  i'kwa.  Mldac  cigwa  ka'i'nandank  udinan 

20  mi/u  usayan :  "Minagu  kaga't  lici/u  tcinibuyan  ?"  udinan. 
Wo'O'dac  ugl'i'gon  :  "Kuniga  a'pidci  kamanandam !"  ugri*- 
nan  mi/u  uclmayan. 


"Aye8,"    krr'kitu    asa/u   ilkwa ;    "kaga't  ninganagagwata- 
gantam." 


279 

Truly  then  away  started  the  Raven.  It  is  not  known 
for  certain  how  many  moons  the  Raven  was  gone ;  after 
a  long  time  he  returned.  Then  he  told,  saying:  "I  have 
not  learned  how  large  this  earth  is,  so  therefore  I  came 
back  before  I  could  find  out." 

So  Nanabushu  then  spoke  to  the  Raven,  saying :  "  Come, 
so  that  you  may  be  proud  of  yourself  will  I  make  you. 
In  what  manner,  then,  do  you  wish  to  feel  pride  in  yourself?" 

"Nanabushu,  as  it  looks  on  a  clear  day  when  the  sky 
is  blue,  so  would  I  have  you  make  me." 

Thereupon  truly  Nanabushu  colored  him  blue.  Now 
such  is  the  look  of  the  Raven,  he  was  made  so  by  Nanabushu. 

SERIES  III.    Nos.  33-38. 
33.   NANABUSHU  FEIGNS  DEATH  TO  MARRY  HIS  SISTER. 

Well,  so  then  there  they  dwelt,  Nanabushu  dwelt  with 
his  younger  sister.  And  so  while  they  were  passing  the 
winter  there,  then  once  thought  Nanabushu:  "Wonder 
how  I  shall  do  to  marry  that  little  sister  of  mine  l  whom 
I  desire!"  And  so  he  began  seeking  for  a  way,  where 
upon  he  made  out  as  if  he  were  sick.  And  now  truly 
by  her  was  he  nursed  very  tenderly.  Truly,  so  much  care 
did  he  make  his  young  sister  bestow  upon  him,  that  at 
last  (she  began  to  think) :  "  Wonder  now  if  my  big  brother 
is  really  going  to  die !"  (thus)  thought  the  woman.  And 
so  when  she  had  had  this  thought,  she  said  to  her  elder 
brother:  "Is  it  really  true  that  you  are  going  to  die?"  she 
said  to  him.  And  this  she  was  told:  "Wonder  if  you 
would  feel  very  sad  about  it!"  he  said  to  his  younger  sister. 

"Yes,"  said  the  woman;  "truly,  I  should  be  griev 
ously  sad." 

1  The  younger  of  the  Foolish  Maidens. 


280 

0'0'dac    ugri'nan    mlnawa  na'kwa'tawat  Ini/u  ucimayan : 

"Kuniga  kiga'rnantam  48i/u  ka/rninan.     Ambasa,  kigaTnin 

Ii8i/u  ka/rnantaman.    Mlsa  win  cigwa  kaga't  48i/u  tcinibuyan," 

ugi'i'nan   !ni/u  ucimayan.      "Anlc,   ka'i'cictcigayan  wlsiniwin 

5   klgata'ton     rrma     katacicinan,"    ugri'nan    Ini/u    ucimayan. 

"Migu'i'i*  ajipapagantaman  i'i'u  aninan,  anlc  kawasa  i'i'wln 

tcipimadisiyamban,"  ugri'nan  Ini/u  ucimayan.     "Miya'tagu  iu 

ka'i'ciwabantaman  i'i'ma  tcrrcipa^agitandamamban,  i'i'ma 

anikwacinan  tci'a-ttoyan  iu  wlsiniwin.    Po'tcidac  nlngamldcin. 

10   Mlsa/  iu  kadicictcigayan." 


Midac  kagalt  ka'i'cinibunit  mi/u  usayayan  Ia8a/u  i'kwa, 
ka'i'cisaka'kinat.  Kawlndac  ugina'i-nasm,  mlgu'i'ma 
plndik  antawat  ka'i'cicininit.  Midac  monjag  mawi  Ia8a/u 
i'kwa,  mlsax  kagabagljik  mawit.  Midac  kaga't  ka'i'cictcigat 
15  (isi/u  kra-'tot  48i/u  wlsiniwin  i'i'ma  anikwacininit.  Misax, 
tasing  patagwicingin  pra'ntawabandank  4ci/u  mldcim  ima 
ka'af'tot,  kaga't  owabandan  ajiganjlcininit.  "Kaga't  mm- 
angwana  umldcinatug,"  inandam. 


Midac  ka*a-nimadcanitcin  mi/u  ucimayan,  mi  cigwa  nniskat 
20  wlsinit;  anica  nibu'kasu.      Midac  acictcigat  48i/u  rrma  ani- 
kwacing  a'tanik,  iu  wlsiniwin  ajipapazagapi'tod.     Anlc  mlgu 
tasing  i'i*u  ajictcigat,  kaya  wlsinit  kanimadcanitcin. 


Ningutingiku  anitagwicing,  Ia8a/u  i'kwa  wawabigunotciyan 

pimra/cawiba'tdnit    owabaman  i'i'ma  utickwantaming ;   uta- 

25   nupa'kita'O'wan,  utanupaplnowan.    O'O'dac  udinan  :  "NingI- 


28l 

And  this  he  said  to  her  when  again  he  replied  to  his 
younger  sister:  "(I)  wonder  if  you  would  consent  to  do 
what  I  am  to  tell  you.  Therefore  I  will  tell  you  what 
you  should  be  willing  to  do.  The  time  is  now  truly  at 
hand  when  I  should  die,"  he  said  to  his  younger  sister. 
"Now,  what  you  should  do  is  to  place  food  there  where 
I  shall  lie  buried,"  he  said  to  his  younger  sister.  "Now, 
this  request  do  you  heed,  according  as  I  tell  you,  for 
there  is  no  hope  at  all  that  I  shall  live,"  he  said  to  his 
younger  sister.  "So  all  that  I  can  now  look  forward  to 
is  the  food  which  now  and  then  you  will  offer ;  there 
where  I  rest  my  head  is  where  you  will  put  the  food. 
And  of  necessity  shall  I  eat  it.  Therefore  that  is  what 
you  shall  do." 

And  so  truly,  when  the  woman's  elder  brother  was  dead, 
then  did  she  dress  him  ready  to  put  away.  But  she  did 
not  bury  him,  so  there  inside  of  their  dwelling-place  was 
where  he  lay.  And  so  continuously  did  the  woman  weep, 
even  throughout  the  whole  of  every  day  she  wept.  And 
so,  truly,  what  she  did  was  to  place  the  food  there  where 
he  laid  his  head.  Accordingly,  as  often  as  she  came  to 
examine  the  food  which  she  had  placed  there,  truly  she 
saw  where  (the  dead)  had  left  the  mark  of  finger-nails. 
"Surely,  in  good  sooth  must  he  have  eaten  it,"  she  thought. 

And  so  every  time  that  his  younger  sister  would  go 
away,  then  would  he  rise  from  where  he  lay  (and)  eat ; 
he  was  only  feigning  death.  And  that  was  what  he  did 
to  what  lay  there  where  he  laid  his  head,  at  the  food  he 
kept  scratching.  Now,  that  continually  was  what  he  did, 
and  what  he  ate  every  time  that  she  would  go  away. 

Now  once,  upon  her  arrival,  the  woman  saw  a  mouse 
come  running  across  the  entry- way ;  she  tried  hitting  it,  but 
without  success,  for  she  failed  every  time  she  tried  to  hit  it. 
And  this  she  said  to  it:  "I  thoroughly  detest  that  hateful 


282 

gagwasaganima  laea/u  matciwawabigundtcrrc  win  awimidcit 
nisayanyan  acimimak."  Midac  agut  Ini/u  wawabigunotcl 
yan:  "  Wmtamawakan  pina7,"  udigon  Ini/u  wawabigundtclyan. 
lOsowidac  ugrrgon  Ini/u  wawabigunotclyan:  "  Kitaglwmta- 
5  mon  ri'u  ananimi'k  'aV11  kisayan." 

" '  Au,  wmdamawicin  !  Maskut  nimpmdcipimaganan  kl- 
ga'a'camin,  wmtamawiyan." 

"  1AU,"  udigon  mi/u  wawabigunotclyan.  "Anica  kuca 
kitotak  i'i>u  kinibu  krrnantaman.  Kawln  kuca  kagalt 

10  nibusl.  Anica  kuca  totam.  Mlginmigu  ka'a*nimadcawadcin 
cigwa  uniskat.  Anica  kuca  kiwTtotak.  O'o*  kuca  kitina- 
nimik,  'Ambadacsa  witigamag,'  kitinanimik.  Ml  guca  anica 
wantcidotank  4si/u  nibu'kasut.  Ml  guca  rru  ananimi'k  kiwin- 
damon  wawani,"  udinan  4a8a/u  wawabigunodcl.  "Mlsagu 

15  mini'k  aciwlndamonan,"  udigon  Ini/u  wawabigunotcra'n. 
"Ambasano,  ayangwamisin,  po'tcigu  tciwldigami'k,  mrr11 
anantank." 


"Mmangwana  iu !"  ilkitu  au  i'kwa.  Misa  kawln  kayabi 
kaskandangiban l  utaiyasln.  Misa7  klwabinank  ajikiwat. 

20  Cigwa  plndigat  antawat,  uba'kingwabinan  Ini/u  usayayan. 
Amc  mawi  pa'klngwanat  Ini/u  usayayan,  o'O'tac  udinan : 
"Amc,  misa  intawa  tcipagitanimak  wa8a/u  nisaya,  mlsa 
intawa  tcina'i'nak  nongum  kiciga'k,"  i'kito  'aca/u  i'kwa. 
"Amantcigic  ka'i'ci-a*wagan  wasa/u  nisaya!  nirigawaci'a' 

25   mawln."     Misa7  aciwawanantank  i'i'u  aniwawajra/t.     Cigwa 

1  Kaskandangiban,  "her  sadness 5"  literally,  it  is  a  construction  meaning  "in  the 
sadness  she  was  in."  Most  Ojibwa  dialects  would  have  the  noun  kaskandamowin, 
"sadness." 


283 

Mouse,  for  he  is  the  one  that  keeps  eating  what  I  feed 
my  elder  brother."  And  this  she  was  told  by  the  Mouse  : 
"You  should  by  all  means  tell  him  about  it,"  she  was  told 
by  the  Mouse.  And  this  she  was  told  by  the  Mouse:  "I 
would  have  told  you  what  designs  your  elder  brother  had 
on  you." 

"Ah,  do  tell  me  about  it!  In  return  I  will  give  you 
(one  of)  my  bladder-pouches  (of  grease)  to  eat,  if  you  tell 
me  about  it." 

"Good!"  she  was  told  by  the  Mouse.  "Why,  only  a 
trick  is  he  playing  you,  to  have  you  think  that  he  is  dead. 
Not  really  in  good  earnest  is  he  dead.  He  is  only  sham 
ming.  Now,  it  is  really  true  that  just  as  soon  as  you  are 
gone,  then  up  he  rises  from  where  he  lies.  Why,  he  is 
only  deceiving  you.  This  really  is  his  thought  of  you, 
'Would  that  I  might  marry  her!'  (such)  is  his  thought  of 
you.  Such  really  is  the  foolish  cause  of  his  feigning  death. 
So  what  his  actual  design  upon  you  is  I  have  now  told 
you  plainly,"  to  her  said  the  Mouse.  "Therefore  such  is 
all  I  have  to  tell  you,"  she  was  told  by  the  Mouse.  "I 
warn  you,  take  care !  for  he  is  determined  to  marry  you, 
and  that  is  his  desire." 

"So  that  is  the  intent!"  said  the  woman.  W7hereupon 
she  carried  (her)  sadness  l  no  longer.  Leaving  the  place 
there,  she  went  back  home.  When  she  entered  into  where 
they  lived,  she  uncovered  the  face  of  her  elder  brother. 
Still  was  she  crying  when  she  uncovered  the  face  of  her 
elder  brother,  and  this  she  said  to  him:  "Well,  the  time 
has  now  come  for  me  to  give  my  elder  brother  up  for 
burial,  hence  it  is  for  me  to  bury  him  this  very  day,"  said 
the  woman.  "Would  that  I  knew  what  to  do  with  my 
elder  brother !  I  should  paint  his  face."  And  then  she 
was  at  a  loss  as  to  how  she  would  paint  him.  Then  she 

'2  It  is  the  custom  to  paint  the  face  red  at  burial  5  the  design  is  round. 


284 

uglkanonigon  :  "O'er  ijrrcin,"  ugrrnan  Ini/u  ucimayan, 
"Klwi'tasklcig  mri''u  ijipru'cin,"  ugrrnan  Ini/u  ucimayan, 
Midac  kaga/t  ksrrcrrgut  Ini/u  ucimayan. 


Ka'kijra't,  cigwa  kimadci'ta  krirji'tot  wani'kan,  midac 
5  ka'i'jipagunagwatank  o  a'ki.  Mlsa7  kacictcigat  'a8a/u  i'kwa. 
Misax  cigwa  kinanzi(kawat  usayayan,  i-i'ma  kiciwinat  owani- 
'kaning.  Midac  ka-rcra'dcita'klwabinat,  ka-ijiningwa'a'nk. 
Midac  cigwa  klmadci'tad  mi'tigon  kri'na'kwagawat  i'i'ma 
ka'paginat  Ini/u  usayayan ;  nlbiwadac  mi'tigon  i'i'ma  ugrr- 

10  na'kwagawan.  "Mlma'i-  aniwa'k  tcibwanawi'u-'pan  nomag," 
kri-nantam  lasa/u  i'kwa.  Midac  acikanonat  Ini/u  wawabi- 
gunotclyan :  "Ambasano,  wldo'kawicin,"  ugri'nan.  "Ka'i*- 
cimlnat  4si/u  waga'kwat :  "Ambasano  mawixn,  kagabagljik 
tcimadwa'i'gayan.  'Nisaya11!'  klga'i'natam  tcimawiyan. 

15  Minotc  nlwimadcinicima.  Kagux  wl'ka  kibi'twa/i'ga'kan," 
ugri-nan  ini/u  wawabigunotclyan.  Mlsax  ka/rcimadcat  a11 
i'kwa  pabimiba'tot. 


Misax,  Nanabucu  cacingicing  pisintawat  ucimayan  mawinit 
kagabagljik,  wo'O'dac  kri*nandam  :  "Ningri'niga'a-  niclma, 
20  ambasano  ningawabama."  Mi  cigwa  klwrkwatcru't.  Misax 
ka'i'jikaski'u't,  anm  ka-i'cinang  ima  ka'paginigut  mi'tigo8 
ayaplta'kucininit.  Onontan  madwa/rganit  ucimayan.  Midac 
ka'i'jinasi'tawat,  anuanri'nabit ;  kawln  wabamasin  antanwa- 
wasininig  i*i*u  waga'kwat.  Kuniginin  uglwabaman  wawa- 


was  addressed  by  him  saying:1  "In  this  manner  do  you 
paint  me,"  he  said  to  his  younger  sister.  "Round  about 
the  eyes,  there  do  you  paint  me,"  he  said  to  his  younger 
sister.  Thereupon  truly  was  he  painted  by  his  younger 
sister. 

When  she  was  done  with  him,  she  then  set  to  work 
making  a  hole  in  the  ground,  whereupon  she  dug  clear 
on  through  this  earth.  Such  was  what  the  woman  did. 
And  so  then  she  went  to  get  her  elder  brother,  she 
fetched  him  to  yonder  hole  in  the  ground.  And  when 
she  had  pitched  him  in  head  first,  she  covered  up  the  hole. 
Thereupon  she  then  set  to  work  felling  trees  over  the 
place  where  she  had  flung  her  elder  brother;  and  many 
a  tree  she  felled  over  the  place  there.  "It  is  possible 
that  for  some  time  he  will  be  unable  to  get  out,"  thought 
the  woman.  Thereupon  she  spoke  to  the  Mouse,  saying: 
"Pray,  do  help  me!"  she  said  to  him.  When  she  had  given 
him  an  axe,  "I  beg  of  you,  cry!  throughout  the  whole  of 
every  day  I  would  have  you  heard  chopping  here.  CO 
my  elder  brother!'  is  the  way  you  shall  wail.  In  the 
mean  while  I  will  try  to  flee  from  him.  Never  let  up  with 
the  sound  of  your  chopping,"  she  said  to  the  Mouse. 
Thereupon  off  started  the  woman,  running  as  she  went. 

And  so,  while  Nanabushu  lay  there  listening  to  his 
younger  sister  crying  throughout  the  whole  of  each  day, 
this  was  his  thought:  "I  feel  sorry  for  my  little  sister, 
so  I  will  go  see  her."  Then  he  began  trying  to  get  out. 
And  when  he  had  succeeded  in  getting  out,  what  was  he 
to  see  at  the  place  where  he  was  thrown  but  (numerous) 
trees  piled  up  high.  He  heard  the  sound  of  his  little 
sister  chopping.  Thereupon,  when  he  went  to  where  he 
heard  the  sound  of  it  was,  he  looked,  but  without  result; 
he  did  not  see  her  there  where  the  sound  of  the  axe  was 

1  For  the  dead  to  speak  is  not  inconsistent  with  Ojihwa  beliefs. 


286 

bigunotclyan  madwa/rganit.  Ajinanzilkawat  ajinlwanawat. 
"  Awananlwinan !  madcra/nim  wawlto'kawat !"  ugrrnan. 
Mlsa  ka/r'kitut :  "Kawln  po'tc  kigawanrrsinon  anti  kanl- 
cayan."  Mlsa  kaga't  krklwi'tanantuwatcigat.  Kaga't  udo- 
5  lkawi'a*n  animi'kawanit,  mlsa7  ka'i'jimada'a'nat.  O'O'dac 
ugri'nan:  "Amnti  pl'tcag  a'ki  waa'pa-i'yan?  Po'tcigu 
kiwldigamin,"  ugri'nan. 


Midac  a*a*wati  i'kwa  piminijimut,  cigwa  ugi'kaniman 
piminica'U'gut.  Midac  ka/rnantank  wasa/u  i'kwa  :  "Mimawm 

10  kaga't  tcinicit,"  kri'nantam.  Saga'i^gan  umada'kwan. 
Inabit  kuma  a'pl  owabandan  ubaclwaninig,  awiya  owaba- 
man  nlbawinit,  nabanagatawan  Ini/u  anicinaban  weyabamat. 
Mlsa  ka'i'cimawinanat,  nayagigu  uglplpagiman,  wo'O'widac 
ugri'nan :  "Nosa,  manito  nimpimamltawi'rk !"  ugl'i'nan. 

15  Kawm  kanaga  uglkanonigusln.  Mlnawa  ugl'kanonan : 
"Nosa,  manido  kuca  nimpimamltawi'i'k !"  ugri'nan.  Mlsa7 
ugrrgon :  "Aye8,  indanis,"  ugri'gon ;  "o'o*ma  pimi'ijan," 
ugri'gon ;  "cibagata'a'n." l 


Midac  kaga't  i'i'ma  ka'a'nrijat  inabit,  abanabamat  ani- 

20  cinaban   pamomanit  maskawa'kutciwan.     Mlnangwana  lni/u 

kawabamat  kotagatan.2    Cigwa  ugi'kinaomagon  'asa/uilkwa: 

"Mri-wati     antayan,    mlgu    48i/u    aniciplndigan,"    ugrrgon. 

1  A    set    phrase  which  the  Coot  is  made  to  say  to  all  passing  by,  for  he  stood 
only  on  one  leg. 


287 

heard.  He  was  surprised  to  see  a  Mouse  that  was  chop 
ping  away.  On  going  up  to  where  he  was,  he  clubbed 
him  till  he  was  dead.  "Pshaw!  (what  a)  wretch  that  would 
want  to  help  her!"  he  said  to  him.  And  this  was  what  he 
said:  "It  is  impossible  for  me  to  lose  you,  no  matter  where 
you  may  go."  Thereupon  truly  he  sought  all  around  for 
the  signs  of  her  footprints.  Truly  found  he  the  trail  along 
which  she  had  gone,  whereupon  he  followed  her,  keeping 
on  her  trail.  And  this  he  said  to  her:  "Where  is  the 
world  so  large  that  you  could  escape  me?  for  I  am  deter 
mined  to  marry  you,"  he  said  to  her. 

But  that  woman  now  far  away  was  in  full  flight,  for 
she  knew  that  she  was  being  pursued.  Accordingly  this 
was  what  she  thought:  "There  is  a  chance  that  really  he 
might  kill  me,"  she  thought.  Out  upon  the  ice  of  a  lake 
was  she  come.  Looking  across  at  a  certain  distance  away, 
she  saw  where  (the  lake)  narrowed,  some  one  did  she 
see  standing  (there) ;  on  one  leg  was  standing  the  person 
she  saw.  Thereupon  she  rushed  to  where  the  (person 
was) ;  and  while  on  the  way,  she  kept  crying  aloud  to  him, 
and  this  she  said  to  him:  "O  my  father!  by  a  manitou 
am  I  hard  pressed,"  she  said  to  (the  person).  But  no 
reply  at  all  she  got  from  him.  Again  she  spoke  to  him, 
saying:  "O  my  father!  really  by  a  manitou  am  I  hard 
pressed,"  she  said  to  him.  Then  this  she  was  told:  "Yes, 
my  daughter,"  she  was  told;  "by  this  way  do  you  come," 
she  was  told,  "through  the  space  between  my  legs." l 

It  is  true  that  when  she  had  gone  on  (through),  she 
looked ;  when  looking  back,  she  saw  him  carrying  the 
frozen  body  of  a  dead  person  upon  his  back.  It  happened 
that  the  one  whom  she  saw  was  the  Coot.2  Then  by  him 
was  the  woman  instructed:  "At  yonder  place  is  where  I 

2  Kotagat,  the  story  name  of  the  Coot,  whose  real  name  is  Atcigate.     \ 


288 

Midac  gaga't  anibabimiba'tod  casa/u  i'kwa,  cigwa  kaga't 
owabandan  kickabi'kanig,  anotc  H'ma  ajabi'kung  wanda- 
mu'tonit  !ni/u  osan.  Cigwa  kra/nitagwicin,  kaga/t  owaban 
dan  skwantam.  Acipa'ka'kunang,  mmangwana  asin  pijicik 
5  wawlgiwaminit.  O'o'dac  ugri'gon :  "Ambasano,  anigu'k 
kiba'ku'a-n  kiblndigayan,"  ugri'gon.  "Pama  nm  unagucig 
ningatagwicin,"  ugrrgon. 

Amc  mada'kut  Nanabucu;  inabit  uglwabaman  anicinaban 
nlbawinit  awaniban  ulkat  pajik;  unisi'tawlnawan  Nanabucu. 
10  Ml  cigwa  kra'nimadcra/nk,  o*5'widac  ki'rna'a'n : 

"Kotugata !  akikibobo'kunontiya, 
Kaya  kikimama'kinontiya." 

Amc  utaninanzilkawan  Nanabucu.     Cigwa  upacwabaman, 
cigwa  kanonan :  "Anti  ka'a'nrijat  nimindimo'i-mic?"  udinan. 
15    "Anlc,  kin  kuca  ka'i'ninan,  kotagat!"  udinan. 

Anlc  kawln  uganonasm. 

"Km  kuca  ka'i'ninan,  kotagat.  Anti  ka'a'nrijat  kiti- 
nin  kuca." 

u  Kawln  kuca,"  udigon,  "awiya  o'O'ma  klpimosasl  laca/u 
20  kimindimo'rmic,"  udigon.  "Ml  ya'ta  o'O'ma  ka'pimusat 
indanis,  kawlndac  win  awiya  laca/u  kimindimo'i'mic  tcigi- 
'pimosat.  Kawln  ninglwabamasl,"  udinan. 

"Antikuta  ka'a'nri'cat?"  udinan   laca/u  Nanabucu. 
"O'O'ma  clbagata'a'n  krpimri'ja." 

25        Mldac    ajiba'pit    Nanabucu :     "Kito'katinag    clbagatayan 
kanlcayamban !" 

"Anlc,   mlsa  win  i'i'ma  ka'pimi'ijat  indanis. w 

"  1AU,   kaya  nln  ima  ningaija." 

Mlsa    kaga't    cigwa    ri'ma    pimiayawan,    ajipagitciwapa- 


289 

live;  so  straight  in  do  you  go,"  she  was  told.  Thereupon 
truly,  as  she  went  running  along,  then  did  she  really  see 
a  steep  cliff,  and  she  found  her  father's  path  leading  among 
yonder  lofty  rocks.  While  arriving  there,  truly  she  saw 
a  door.  On  opening  it,  it  was  found  that  wholly  of  rock 
was  his  wigwam.  And  this  she  had  been  told:  "Pray, 
tightly  shut  the  door  when  you  pass  inside,"  she  was  told. 
"Not  till  in  the  evening  shall  I  arrive,"  she  was  told. 

Now,  out  upon  the  ice  came  Nanabushu ;  as  he  looked 
about,  he  saw  a  person  standing  only  upon  one  leg ;  him 
Nanabushu  recognized.  So  then  he  began  singing,  and 
this  was  his  song : 

"O  Coot!  you  are  broken  at  the  back  of  the  pelvis, 
And  you  are  maimed  in  a  bad  way  at  the  buttocks." 

So  up  to  where  he  was  went  Nanabushu.  When  he 
was  near  to  him,  then  he  spoke  to  him,  saying:  "Whither 
did  my  old  woman  go?"  he  said  to  him.  "Why,  it  is 
really  you  whom  I  am  asking,  Coot !"  he  said  to  him. 

But  he  did  not  answer  (Nanabushu). 

"You  are  the  one  I  am  really  addressing,  Coot.  Whither 
has  she  gone?  I  am  speaking  to  you  in  earnest." 

"Really,"  he  was  told,  "there  was  no  one  like  your  old 
woman  who  passed  this  way,"  he  was  told.  "The  only 
one  who  passed  here  was  my  daughter,  but  there  was  no 
one  like  your  old  woman  to  pass  this  way.  I  did  not 
see  her,"  he  said  to  him. 

"Pray,  whither  did  she  go?"  to  him  said   Nanabushu. 

"Through  here,  between  my  legs,  she  went." 

Thereupon  did  Nanabushu  laugh.  "The  idea  of  your 
having  legs  in  between  which  I  am  to  pass  through!" 

"Well,  by  that  very  place  did  my  daughter  pass." 

"Very  well,   then  will  I  too  pass  by  that  way." 

And  so  truly,  when  (Nanabushu)  was  passing  under,  then 

19' — PUBL.    AMER.    ETHN.    SOC.    VOL.    VII. 


2QO 

'kamat  !ni/u  maskawa'kutcra/nicinaban,  mlsa  klnisat  Nana- 
bucowan.  Mlsa7  wanagucininik  ka/a'nrrjiklwat,  cigwa 
tagwicin  i'rwiti  antat. 

Mlsa7  owabaman  osan  tagwicininit  'a8a/u  i'kwa.  Misa7 
5  udigon :  "  Kaga'tiguna  klgapapagwatanimin  magwagu  nani- 
sanisiyan !"  Mlsa7  udigon  ini/u  osan:  "Kaga't  uba'ta-i'nu- 
'tonan  ano'katcigan.1  Awawa11,  indanis,  pisanigu  uda'pinan 
wagunan  utinowa  wa/a'yayan.  Waji'ton  kitaiya'rman 
kagigickaman,"  ugl'i'gon  Ini/u  osan. 


10  Anic  misa  kaga't  ka'i'cictcigat  wa8a/u  i'kwa.  Wo'O'widac 
ugri'gon:  "Ambasano,  kagu7  wi'ka  ciaya'kwisito'kan  o'o-wisa 
skwantam.  Kawln  kaga't  ninisasl  lasa/u  Nanabucu.  Kagu7 
pa'ka'kunamawa'kan.  Ta'ka'kunan,'  kiga'i'k.  Kaga't  mas- 
kawi  kipa'ku-a'n.  Kawln  mnwl'ka  nindabisi,  panima  unan- 

15  gucig  nintagwicin,"  udigon  mi  yosan ;  "rnigu  ri'witi  klbi- 
wabamiyan,  pana  iwiti  ayayan,  notci'a'gwa  adi'kwamagwag. 
Mldac  iciaiyangwamiminan."  Misa  kaga't  a'pana  madcanit 
Ini/u  osan. 


Ningutingiku,  a'rnantinit  mi/u  osan,  cayigwa  kaga't  ama- 

20  nisu.     "Pa'ka'kunan  !"  umadwa'i'gon  awiya.      Onisitu'tawan 

Nanabucowan.      Anic,    kl'i'na  kawln  dac  wlpa'ka'kun^zln, 

misa7  andacimigut.     "Pa'ka'kunan !"  igut.    Anic,  kawln  uwl- 

pa'ka'kuna^zm.       Kaga'pl     madwatagickamini     skwantam ; 

kaga'pri'gu  anigu'k,  gaga'pi  ninguting  ajikacki'tonit,  acipa- 

25    'ka'kwisanik  lifii/u  skwantam.    Misa7  ajiplndiganit.    Mlgutawln 

wa'kwantasing  agotanig  upapigwanini  Ini/u  osan,  mlgu  iwiti 

pami'a*'pagisunit.     Ajinonda'ku'tonit,  mldugigu  antipri'cikl- 

1  Ano'-katcigan,  "objects  of  barter;"  sometimes  "goods"  fits  the  meaning.  The 
word  is  used  for  things  bought  at  the  trader's  store,  and  also  for  things  that  are 
given  or  received  as  presents,  such  as  wearing-apparel  and  food  and  ornaments. 


(the  Coot)  dropped  the  frozen  human  body  upon  him, 
whereupon  he  killed  Nanabushu.  And  then  in  the  evening 
on  his  way  back  he  went,  soon  was  he  come  there  where 
he  lived. 

And  so  the  woman  saw  her  father  when  he  came  home. 
And  this  she  was  told:  "How  truly  happy  I  shall  be  to 
have  you  dwelling  with  me  at  just  the  time  when  I  am 
so  lonely!"  And  this  she  was  told  by  her  father:  "Truly 
numerous  are  the  objects  of  barter.1  Yea,  my  daughter, 
at  your  pleasure  take  whatsoever  thing  you  wish.  Make 
whatever  garments  you  are  to  wear,"  she  was  told  by 
her  father. 

Now  that,  in  truth,  was  what  the  woman  did.  And  this 
she  was  told:  "Please  never  leave  this  door  open.  I  did 
not  really  kill  Nanabushu.  Do  not  open  the  door  for  him. 
'Open  it!'  he  will  tell  you.  Without  fail  tightly  do  you 
close  it.  Never  am  I  here  at  home,  not  till  in  the  evening 
do  I  return,"  she  was  told  by  her  father;  "for  at  yonder 
place,  where  you  came  and  saw  me,  is  where  I  continually 
stay,  hunting  for  whitefish.  That  is  why  I  am  urging 
you  to  keep  alert."  Thereupon  truly  off  went  her  father. 

Now  once,  while  her  father  was  absent,  she  became 
greatly  alarmed.  "Open  the  door!"  she  heard  some  one 
saying  to  her.  She  recognized  the  voice  of  Nanabushu. 
Now,  she  had  been  told  that  she  should  not  open  the 
door,  but  she  was  continually  besought.  "Open  the  door!" 
she  was  told.  Now,  she  had  no  desire  to  open  the  door. 
Finally  she  heard  him  kicking  against  the  door;  and  at 
last  (it  was)  with  so  much  force,  that  all  at  once  he  forced 
his  way  in,  and  open  flew  the  door.  Thereupon  he  went 
in.  Now,  truly  at  the  rear  of  the  lodge  was  hanging  her 
father's  flute,  and  straight  for  it  he  flung  himself.  As  he 
blew  upon  it,  then  it  was  that  in  vain  did  her  father  try 


292 

waba'tonit  Ini/u  osan.  Anlc  mlclac  Nanabucu  nonda'kutcigat 
caylgwa  pltcipa*rtiwas  'isi/u  piji'kiwa8.  Minangwana  iu 
wandcikanawantaminit  'isi/u  upipigwanini.  Cigvva  klpasin- 
gutcisa  Ia8a/u  i'kwa,  cigwa  owabaman  lisi/u  piji'kiwa8  ajipln- 
5  digasanit.  Ajinawatcigwanigut  Ini/u  pajik,  ajimadclba'i'gut. 

Anitababandank  kotagat  antat,  aca  udanisan  pimadciwi- 
tcigasowan.  Mlsax  ka'i-jipmdigat  misa'pana  udanisan  kima- 
'kamint.  O'O'dac  kri'nandam  :  "Ambasano  a'pl  ninga-arn- 
tawabama,"  kri'nandam,  ugi^kaniman  i'i'ma.  Mldac 

10  ka'i'nandank  :  "Pamagu  nagatc ;  magica  nintaki;kanimigo  ; 
wlbaku  ninganantawabama,"  kri'nantam.  Mldac  kaga't 
ka'i'cikacki'tot,  mldacigu  krrnantank  unagucininig  kuckwa- 
watabit:  "Kaga'tsa,  ningi'tcigwlnuma 'aVwisa  indanis.  Mlsa 
cigwa  tcra'ntawabamak  'aea/u  nindanis."  Mlsa  ka'i'cimadcat 

15  kra*ntawabamat  !ni/u  utanisan.  Cigwa  utababandan  i'i<u 
odana,  picilkiwTa8  udotanawini.  Anlc  mlwanini11,  wagimawinit 
kama'kamigut  Iniyodanisan.  Caylgwa  anionangucininik, 
uda'kawa'ton  tcitibi'katinik.  Cigwasa  kaga't  kltibi'katini. 
Ajina^zi'kank  49i/u  odana,  wo'O'dac  kl'i'nandam :  "Wfkagasa 

20  taanona  tcinibinatit !"  Cigwa  kaga/t  onondawan  madwano- 
nimint  tcinibinatinit.  Aji'a-'kamawat  ima  agamlng,  cigwa 
owabaman  kaga't.  ulct,"  udinan  ;  "indanis!" 


Ajiplpaginit,     ajinawatinat ;     ajimadclba'tot.        A'panagu 
kabitigwanik  no'pinanigut.    Anlc  anigu'k  pimiba'to.    Kaga't 


to  hasten  home.  So  it  was  that  as  Nanabushu  played 
upon  the  flute,1  then  in  came  rushing  the  buffaloes.  It 
was  for  that  very  use  that  (her  father)  kept  his  flute. 
Just  as  the  woman  sprang  to  her  feet,  then  she  saw  the 
buffalo  come  dashing  inside.  When  she  was  caught  upon 
the  horn  of  one,  then  away  was  she  carried. 

By  the  time  that  the  Coot  was  coming  in  sight  of  his 
home,  already  then  was  his  daughter  being  carried  away. 
And  when  he  went  inside,  then  (he  knew  that)  gone  was 
his  daughter  who  had  been  carried  away.  Now,  this  he 
thought:  "Now  will  I  go  seek  for  her,"  he  thought,  for 
he  knew  where  she  was.  And  this  was  what  he  thought: 
"Not  for  a  while  yet  (will  I  go  to  her);  perhaps  I  might 
be  found  out;  but  soon  will  I  go  to  seek  her,"  he  thought. 
And  so  truly,  when  he  was  able  (to  go),  this  was  his 
thought  (one)  evening  while  he  was  sitting  silently  (alone) : 
"Truly,  very  lonesome  am  I  for  that  daughter  of  mine. 
So  now  the  time  has  come  for  me  to  go  seek  my  daughter." 
Thereupon  off  he  started  to  seek  his  daughter.  Soon  he 
came  in  sight  of  the  town,  the  town  of  the  Buffaloes. 
Now,  it  was  the  chief  of  that  place  who  had  kidnapped 
his  daughter.  As  the  evening  was  now  coming  on,  he 
waited  for  it  to  grow  dark.  Soon  was  it  really  dark. 
When  he  started  to  go  to  the  town,  this  he  thought : 
"Would  that  she  might  be  sent  to  get  water!"  Presently 
he  truly  heard  some  one  bidding  her  go  after  some 
water.  As  he  lay  waiting  for  her  there  by  the  bank  of 
the  stream,  soon  he  saw  her  in  reality.  "Hist!"  he  said 
to  her,  "my  daughter!" 

As  she  screamed,  he  seized  her ;  then  he  started  running. 
And  there  was  a  continuous  roar  when  he  was  pursued. 
So  with  all  his  speed  he  ran.  Truly,  he  was  hard  pressed 

1  The  use  of  a  musical  instrument  or  song  as  a  miraculous  agent  in  having 
animate  objects  appear,  is  a  prominent  literary  element. 


294 

oga'kri'go  paminica'irgut.  "Mimawln  tcinontayanigoyan," 
inantam.  Kaga/t  anigu'k  pimiba'to,  mawinatang  Ii8i/u 
andat.  Mindcimigu  tababandank  ri'u  andat,  mrru  cigwa 
tababamat  Ini/u  paminicirtrgut.  "Mlmawm  kaga  tcitaplndi- 
5  gaba'rwayan,"  inantam  48i/u  andat.  Cigwa  ubacwabandan 
4si/u  andat,  mi  cigwa  alpidci  pacwabamigut  Ini/u  paminica- 
•u'gut.  Aca  kitibanantamasut,  amc  ugicaya'kwisiton  ml'i/-u 
antat.  Amc  ajiplndigat,  kacka'kuwabinang  mri7'11  antat. 
Kagaku  onondanigun  48i/u  paminica'U'gut.  Amc  cigwa 

10  uglplndigaba'a'n ;  kawln  dac  takaski*u'siwas  tciplndiganit 
mi*i/>u  andat.  "Ambasano,  ayangwamisin,"  ugri'nan  Ini/u 
utanisan.  "Kagu7  minawa  awiya  ugawikacki'tosln  tciwlpa- 
'ka'kunang  48i/u  andayang,"  ugri'nan  mi/u  udanisan.  "Kaga't 
kigi'kwanumin,  idac  ka-u*ndcinanzalkawinan.  Ambadac, 

15  ayangwamisin, "  ugri'nan  ini/u  udanisan.  Anlc  mlsa  kayabi 
ayinanu'klnit  Ini/u  osan.  Kaga'tidacigu  anawi  kabaya'r 
ugiwitcayawan,  cigwa  minawa,  "Kanabatc  minawa  kaga 
tci'a'manisuyan,"  udinan  Ini/u  udanisan.  Anlc  ad^kama- 
gwan  ubabltciwananini  Ini/u  osan ;  anlc  mlguna  iu  amwawat, 

20   "Kawln  kuca  kaga't  ninginisasl  'aca/u  Nanabucu." 


Ningutingiku,  kaga't  awiya  onontawan  rrma  agwatclng 
madwaklgitonit.  O<r  i'kitowan :  "Pa'ka'kunan !"  udigon. 
Unisita'tawan  Ini/u  awinit  Nanabucowan,  mlsa7  kawln 
uwlpa'ka'kunasln.  Mldac  kaga'pl  madwa-i-citangickaminit 
25  48i/u  skwantam,  anlc  kawln  anawi  ugackitoslnini  'ici/u 
skwantam.  Ningutingiku  kaga'pl  pa'ka'kwisanik  i'i'u  skwan 
tam,  miku  rrwiti  pama'a^pagisunit  agotanik  osan  papig- 
wanini.  Acinondagwatonit,  caylgwa  onontan  'aca/u  wada- 


295 

by  them  that  pursued  him.  "Possibly  I  shall  be  overtaken 
before  I  get  home,"  he  thought.  Truly,  with  all  his  speed 
he  ran,  when  making  for  his  home.  Just  as  he  came 
in  sight  of  his  home,  then  he  caught  sight  of  them  who 
were  pursuing  him.  "It  is  barely  possible  that  I  shall  be 
able  to  flee  inside,"  he  thought  concerning  his  home. 
Then  he  was  nearing  his  dwelling,  when  very  close  upon 
him  were  those  that  pursued  him.  As  now  he  looked 
back,  then  was  the  door  of  his  home  already  open.  Now, 
as  he  entered,  he  slammed  the  door  of  his  home  shut. 
Almost  was  he  overtaken  by  those  that  pursued  him. 
Thus  he  then  got  her  inside ;  and  unable  would  the 
others  be  to  get  into  where  he  lived.  "Please  be  on 
your  guard,"  he  said  to  his  daughter.  "Never  again  let 
any  one  succeed  in  opening  the  door  of  the  place  where 
we  live,"  he  said  to  his  daughter.  "Truly  mindful  was  I 
of  you,  and  on  that  account  I  went  to  get  you.  Now, 
please  be  careful,"  he  said  to  his  daughter.  And  so  still 
on  with  his  work  her  father  continued.  Truly,  in  spite  of 
the  long  while  that  she  was  spending  with  him,  yet  again, 
"Perhaps  the  time  is  near  at  hand  for  you  to  be  alarmed 
again,"  he  said  to  his  daughter.  Now,  whitefish  was  her 
father  continually  fetching  home  in  his  pack ;  and  while 
they  were  (once)  eating  it,  "Why,  I  did  not  really  slay 
Nanabushu." 

Now,  once  she  truly  heard  the  voice  of  some  one  speaking 
there  out  of  doors.  This  (the  person)  was  saying:  "Open 
the  door!"  she  was  told.  She  knew  by  the  voice  that  it 
was  Nanabushu ;  but  she  was  not  anxious  to  open  the 
door.  And  then  finally  she  heard  him  kicking  against 
the  entry-way ;  but,  in  spite  of  his  efforts,  he  could  not 
succeed.  Suddenly  at  last  open  flew  the  entry-way,  and 
(Nanabushu)  rushed  straight  to  where  her  father's  flute 
was  hanging.  As  he  blew  upon  it,  presently  the  owner 


296 

•iTmit.  Anublciklwabaltot ;  anlcina  pasi'ka  48i/u  anubikl- 
waba'tot.  Cigwa  otababantan  lisi/u  andat.  "Kagatsa 
nlngagwanisaganima  Ia8a/u  Nanabucu  kacki'togwan  lici'u 
skwantam,"  i'kito.  Caylgwa  anlnabit,  aca  pimisagitcipa'i'- 
5  mint  Ini/u  udanisan.  Mlsa'pana  mlnawa  klma'kamint  Ini/u 
udanisan.  Mldac  ka'totawat  Ini/u  Nanabucowan  kisagitci- 
pasiga'kwanawat.  Kaga/tsa  manantam  Ini/u  udanisan  mi- 
nawa  kiplma'kamint  Ini/u.  Misa/  mlnawa  klnicikawisit.  Amc, 
mlsax  mlnawa  ka'i'ci'a-yayat  pisan,  u  Kagatsa  ningi'tcigwlna- 

10  wanima  lasa/u  indanis.  Ambasano'pl  mlnawa  ninga'a'nta- 
wabama,"  kl'i'nantam.  Mlsax  kaga't  cigwa  mlnawaklmadcat. 
Mlsa7  mlnawa  acictcigat,  anipi'tot  tcitibikatinig.  "Wl'ka- 
gasa  tawimini'kwa,"  udinaniman  Ini/u  uningwanan.  Cigwa 
kaga't  madwaklgitowan  :  "Taga,  nibinatin,"  madwa'i'niman 

15  ini/u  udanisan.  Amc,  mri/<u  cigwa  mlnawa  kru'na'kamawat, 
kao^a'tipfu  kawlnidac  uo^anonasi.  Mldac  ka^a/t  owabaman 

o  o  o  •  •  o 

pini'tcigusanit  ini/u  udanisan.  Mlsa7  ajinawatinat  lni/u 
udanisan,  kawlnidac  mamwatc  uganonasln.  Mlgu  iu  pisan 
ajinawatinat. 


20  Wibagu  cigwa  madasinima,  cigwa  mmawa  madcinicawa. 
Anic  anigu'k  pimiba'to.  Kaga/t  uga'kri'gon  48i/u  pamini- 
ca'u'gut.  Amc  ml  kayabi  ka'ijitcigat,  klcaya'kwisitot  48i/u 
antat.  Caylgwa  ubacwawabantan.  "Mlmawln  tcinontaya- 
nigoyan,"  kri-nantam.  Caylgwa  o'O'wa  plni'kwaniwan 

25  wrpiwapa-u-gut,  anlc  mlsax  ka/rciplndigaba'a/t.  Mlgu 
kacka'kuwabinang,  i'i'ma  pimadwacininit.  Inabit,  mlnan- 


297 

heard  it.  He  tried  running  home,  but  to  no  purpose;  why, 
it  was  slow  progress  as  he  tried  in  vain  to  hurry  home. 
Finally  he  came  in  sight  of  his  home.  "Truly  do  I 
thoroughly  loathe  that  Nanabushu,  for  that  he  should  be 
able  to  force  the  entry-way,"  he  said.  By  the  time  he 
was  there  to  look,  he  saw  that  already  had  his  daughter 
been  carried  out.  And  so  gone  again  was  his  daughter 
who  had  been  taken  from  him.  And  what  he  did  to 
Nanabushu  was  to  kick  him  out  of  doors  (and  send  him 
to  the  lake).  Truly  ugly  did  he  feel  to  be  deprived  of 
his  daughter.  And  so  once  more  he  was  alone.  Well, 
when  again  he  had  remained  inactive,  "Truly  am  I  ex 
ceedingly  lonely  for  my  daughter.  Therefore  I  will  go 
seek  for  her  again,"  he  thought.  Thereupon  truly  soon 
was  he  off  again.  And  so  he  did  the  same  as  before, 
he  waited  for  darkness  to  come.  "Would  that  he  might 
thirst!"  was  the  thought  he  had  of  his  son-in-law.  Presently 
he  truly  heard  him  saying:  "Come,  go  fetch  water!"  he 
heard  him  say  to  his  daughter.  Well,  accordingly,  then 
again  did  he  lie  in  wait  for  her,  and  really  he  did  not 
even  speak  to  her.  Thereupon  truly  he  saw  the  dim  figure 
of  his  daughter  walking  hitherward  (through  the  darkness). 
And  so,  when  he  seized  his  daughter,  it  was  necessary 
for  him  to  speak  to  her.  So  he  quietly  took  her  away. 

Now,  in  a  little  while  her  presence  was  missed,  then 
again  she  was  pursued.  Naturally  hard  ran  (the  Coot). 
Truly  hard  was  he  pressed  by  those  who  were  pursuing 
him.  Now,  what  he  did  was  the  same  as  before :  he  had 
left  open  the  door  of  the  place  where  he  lived.  Finally 
he  was  in  close  view  of  it.  "There  is  a  chance  that  I 
shall  be  overtaken  before  I  get  there,"  he  thought.  Now 
by  the  horned  creature  was  he  about  to  be  hooked,  but 
it  was  then  that  he  carried  her  inside.  Just  the  moment 
that  he  slammed  the  door  to,  then  he  heard  some  one 


298 

gwana  uctigwanini  klgackalkamawat ;  gra*4tani  rrma  plndig, 
kakiwa'o'danik  uskiciguni,  ka/rciklckigwasanit  !ni/u  unln- 
gwanan.  Mlwanini'11  wagimawinit,  mlsa'  ka/rcinisat. 


Amc,  misa  pinawitclt  kra'gota. 


34.  NANABUSHU  is  FED  MEAT  FROM  THE  BACK  OF  A  WOMAN. 

5  Amc,  aTntawag  ima  anicinabag,  Nanabucu  unldcanisa6 
niciwa8  wlwan  kaya.  Misa7  ima  papiponiciwat,  anlcina, 
nawatciku  kawin  kago  una'a'nimusm.  Amc,  misa7  tcigwa 
tcipiponini,  misa7  kawin  w!lka  na  ubltosm  kago.  Anlc 
misa7  pa'kadawad.  Ningutinbiku,  pabamusat,  anicinaba8 
10  ajiudisat ;  niciwa8  abinotclya8  abiwan  Ini/u  ininiwan. 


Amc,  misa',  a'kitunit :  "Amn  dac  na,  kiga'a'siwang 'a8a/u 
kipiwitaminan,"  udinan  wlwan.  Anlc,  skwantang  nasama- 
piwan  lni/u  i'kwawan.  Aci'o'nagota'ki'kwanit.  Amc,  acigmi- 
botonit  umo'kumanini,  mackimuta'kawan  Ini/u  wlwini.  Misa' 

15  ka'klcibotonit  *isi/u  umo'kumanini,  ubiminana'tabi'tawanini 
mi/u  wlwini.  Ajigitaska'kunamawat  Ini/u  wlwan  udanika- 
manini,3  ajimi'tawaganabinat ;  ajipajicwat  nawawigan ;  misa7 
acipa'kwaninwacwat ;  kawin  kanaga  madapisiwan  Ini/u 
i'kwawan.  Misa7  kaujipicagawiganacwat  Ini/u  wlwini,  aci- 

20  poda'kwawanit  rrma  a'ki'kung.  A'ka'kanja  aji'o'da'pina- 
minit,  acisinigunamawanit  i'i'ma  u'pi'kwananing.  Acisaga- 
'kuwat  mlnawa.  Misa7  kawin  kanaga  gimadapisiwan  Ini/u 

1  The  Buffalo  that  had  taken  his  daughter. 

~  U'danikamanini,  "her  shoulder-straps,"  a  sort  of  suspender  going  over  the 
shoulder,  and  thus  holding  up  the  skirt.  This  piece  of  garment  is  no  longer  worn 
by  the  women  of  to-day. 


299 

come  up  against  it.  He  looked,  and  it  was  the  head  (of 
his  son-in-law,1)  from  whom  he  had  severed  it;  it  lay  there 
indoors,  out  bulged  his  eyes,  off  had  broken  the  neck  of 
his  son-in-law.  Now,  the  one  that  had  been  chief  was  the 
one  (the  Coot)  slew. 

Well,  so  then  the  buttocks  of  the  ruffed  grouse  now 
hangs  aloft. 

34.  NANABUSHU  is  FED  MEAT  FROM  THE  BACK  OF  A  WOMAN. 

Now,  abiding  at  the  place  were  some  people,  the  two 
children  of  Nanabushu  and  his  wife.  And  so  there,  where 
they  passed  the  winter,  why,  hardly  any  food  had  they 
in  store.  Well,  it  was  now  far  into  the  winter,  and  never 
a  single  thing  did  he  fetch  home.  Naturally,  therefore, 
they  grew  hungry.  And  once,  when  walking  about,  to 
where  some  people  were  he  came ;  there  were  two  children, 
(and)  at  home  was  the  man. 

So,  therefore,  said  (the  man):  "Why,  let  us  feed  our 
visitor,"  (thus)  he  said  to  his  wife.  Now,  with  her  face 
towards  the  door  was  the  woman  seated.  Then  she  placed 
her  kettle  hanging  from  a  hook.  Now,  while  (the  man) 
was  sharpening  his  knife,  his  wife  was  weaving  a  bag. 
And  when  he  had  finished  sharpening  his  knife,  he  moved 
over  to  sit  next  to  his  wife.  Then,  unfastening  his  wife's 
shoulder-straps,3  he  exposed  her  at  the  back;  he  then 
sliced  her  down  the  middle  of  the  back  with  a  knife;  and 
he  then  sliced  away  a  piece  of  fat  from  her;  not  a  whit 
did  his  wife  budge.  And  so,  when  he  had  sliced  a  piece 
from  the  back  of  his  wife,  she  then  put  it  into  the  kettle 
to  boil.  Picking  up  some  charcoal,  he  then  rubbed  it  on 
her  back.3  Then  he  fastened  her  garment  on  again.  And 

3  In  order  to  render  the  place  whole  again,  —  a  common  formula  for  miraculous 
restoration. 


300 

i'kwawan.     Tcigwa    klcisa/kwawan,    "Amc,   rnlsa  iu  aciwlsi- 
niyamban,"  ina  Nanabucu. 

Midac    kaga/t    ajiwisinit,    panagu   kamskininu'tanig  misa/ 
ajiwisinit.      Kuma  mini'k  skwantciga  Nanabucu. 

5        aMri/>u    ijiklwawita11    kimtcanisag    na    mini'k    ackwantci- 
gayan." 

Misa/  cigwa  wrklwa.      "  Awagwanigic  ?"  kri-nantam. 

Mmangwana  umackoson  kawudisat.  Amc  mlsa  cigwa 
krki'kanimat  ayawinit.  Cigwa  wl'klwa,  aci'a'bawat  Ii8i/u 
10  uglcotabisonas  48i/u  wabosowayana8 ;  acicangwantaginat  lij:i/u 
ugico'tawuna8,  ajisaga'a'nk.  Kuma'pl  ani'a'yat,  usagitcini- 
ca'irgo  'ici/u  abinotclya8.  Midac  aciplpagit  "Al!"  i'kito ; 
"klwanl'ka  kiglco'ta'u'nag !" 


"Nindocimag  ugapmawa,"  udina. 
15        Mlsa7  kaga't  wabamimawat  abinit. 

"Wasagu  udciwabinamawi'k.    Kawln  kigapasamigusiwaV 


.  Midac  kaga't  wasagu  wa/irndciwabinamagu  'ifii/u  abino- 
tciga8.  "Ic!"  udina8;  "kawunagunawabinawag,"  udina8. 
"Pimlciyu'kiku !"  udina8.  Amc  misax  kaga't  awiciminigut, 
20  mldac  anicimadclba'i'tinit.  Amc,  ugri'na8  au  awati  wanl- 
tcanisit :  "  Wasagu  undciwabinamawi^k,  kawin  klgabasami- 
guslwa."  Midac  kaga't  anawi'totaminit,  amc  ugl'irndcra*- 
nidic.  Midac  ka/rnat  a'p!  kamlnigut :  "Ambasino,  wabang 
kosiwa  tablca,"  ugi'i'na8.  Mlsax  ka'i'ciklwaba'i'tiwat  Igi/u 


3oi 

not  a  whit  had  his  wife  moved.  So  when  she  had  finished 
with  the  cooking,  "Well,  you  may  now  as  well  eat,"  was 
told  Nanabushu. 

Thereupon  truly  did  Nanabushu  eat,  forthwith  after  the 
fat  was  boiled  was  when  he  ate.  A  certain  part  of  it 
Nanabushu  refrained  from  eating. 

"That  much  which  you  saved  do  you  take  to  your 
children." 

Therefore  now  was  he  on  the  point  of  going  back 
home.  "Who  in  the  world  (is  it)?"  he  thought. 

Now,  it  happened  to  be  the  elk  whom  he  had  visited. 
So  then  at  last  he  found  out  who  it  was.  As  he  was 
about  setting  out  for  home,  he  untied  his  mittens  of  rabbit- 
fur  ;  then,  putting  his  mittens  in  the  balsam  boughs  (under 
the  mat),  he  went  out  of  doors.  When  some  distance 
away  he  was  come,  out  of  doors  rushed  the  children  after 
him.  And  then  one  called  aloud  (to  him):  "Hey!"  he 
said,  "you  forgot  your  mittens!" 

"My  nephews  will  fetch  them,"   he  said  to  them. 

And  then  they  saw  where  they  were. 

"And  from  afar  do  you  throw  them  to  him.  He  will 
not  refrain  from  saying  something  to  you." 

Thereupon  truly  from  afar  were  the  children  intending 
to  throw  them  to  him,  when,  "Stop!"  he  said  to  them; 
"do  not  throw  them  into  the  snow,  (lest  they  be  lost,)" 
he  said  to  them.  "Come,  hand  them  to  me!"  he  said  to 
them.  So  accordingly  he  truly  had  them  handed  to  him, 
whereupon  back  (the  children)  started  racing  as  they  went. 
Now,  yonder  parent  of  the  children  had  said  to  them : 
"From  afar  do  you  hand  them  to  him,  for  he  will  not 
refrain  from  saying  something  to  you."  Therefore  they 
truly  tried  to  do  so,  but  (Nanabushu)  prevented  them. 
And  this  was  what  he  said  to  them  when  he  was  given 
(the  mittens):  "Now,  to-morrow  let  your  father  come,"  he 


302 

kwlwisansag,  ajiwlndamawawat  unlgiigowa8  a'kitunit  Nana- 
bucowan  :  " 'Kaba'katamwasa  kmawa!,'"  udina  48i/u  unlgi- 
•i'gowa8  !gi/u  kwlwisansag. 

Mlsa'  a'kitut  ainini :    "Anlcina,  ninga'rca,"  i'kito. 
5        Cigwasa'    anitagwicin    andawat.      Anlc    ubltawa8   unldca- 
nisa8    48i/u    ka*a'caminit.      Cigwax    uganonan    Ini/u    wlwan : 
"Kawlnsana     wfka     tci'U'mackimuta'kayan?"     udinan    mi/u 
wlwan. 

"Indacka  mlnawa  awiya  klwabamagwan  Ii8i/u  ajictciganit," 
10  udigon  Ini/u  wlwan. 

"Awawar  ijictcigan !"  udinan. 

Mlsax   kaga't  ajimackimuta'kat  wayabaninik  'a8a/u  i'kwa. 
Anlc    abr    lasa/u  Nanabucu,  obl'a-n.      Cigwasa7  piklgitowa8 
unldcanisa8 :     "Nackaginm,    cigwa    plwita!"    udigo8.      Anlc 
1 5   mlsa/  aciplndigagowat  Ini/u  plwitan.     Misa7  namadabinit. 


"  Wagunana7  kaglga'a-nk  lasa/u  plwita?"  udinan  !ni/u  wlwan. 

"  Wagunandac  48i/u  ayayan  ?"  udigon  Ini/u  wlwan. 

Anlc  madciboton  omo'kuman. 

Cocammgwaniwan  upiwitaman. 

20  Ml  cigwa  kro'nagota'ki'kwat.  Anlc  cigwa  uglgidis  ka- 
'kunamawan  udani'kamanini  ini/u  wlwan,  acini'tawaganabinat 
lni/u  wlwan-,  ajipacicwat  ima  pi'kwananing.  Anlcina,  "IgoM" 
udigon. 

Cocammgwaniwan  Ini/u  ublwitaman.    "Tagackuma,  Nana- 
25   bucu,"  udigon.   Anlc,  m!sa/  aci-a'ntutamagiit  (i8i/u  mo'kuman, 
mldac    agut :     "Taga,    Nanabucu!"    udigon.      "Agackuma, 
Nanabucu !"  udigon. 


Acimlnat     48i/u     mo'kuman,     acipacawaganacumint    mi/u 

wlwan,  mlsa7  kawln  kanaga  madapislwan.      Pa'kwadicumint 

30  lni/u  wlninon.     Cigwa  uglpa'kwadicwanini,   "  'Au,  Nanabucu, 


303 

said  to  them.  When  the  boys  had  raced  back  home, 
they  told  their  parents  what  Nanabushu  had  said.  u  'You 
must  be  hungry !'  "  the  boys  said  to  their  parents. 

Thereupon  said  the  man:  "Of  course,  I  will  go,"  he  said. 

In  the  mean  while  (Nanabushu)  was  arriving  home.  Now, 
he  fetched  home  to  his  children  what  had  been  given  him 
to  eat.  Then  he  spoke  to  his  wife,  saying:  "Why  do  you 
never  weave  bags?"  he  said  to  his  wife. 

"No  doubt  but  that  again  he  must  have  seen  somebody 
doing  that,"  he  was  told  by  his  wife. 

"Go  ahead  and  do  it!"  he  said  to  her. 

Thereupon  truly  did  the  woman  set  to  work  weaving 
a  bag  on  the  morrow.  So  at  home  was  Nanabushu,  he 
was  waiting  for  (his  guest).  At  last  came  his  children, 
saying:  "Oh,  see!  here  is  a  visitor!"  he  was  told.  So 
thereupon  in  where  they  were  came  the  visitor.  And 
then  he  sat  down. 

"What  shall  we  feed  the  visitor?"  he  said  to  his  wife. 

"Now,  what  do  you  have?"  he  was  told  by  his  wife. 

So  he  began  filing  his  knife. 

Then  a  smile  was  on  the  face  of  their  visitor. 

Then  finally  (Nanabushu)  hung  up  the  kettle.  So  when 
he  had  unfastened  his  wife's  shoulder-straps,  he  uncovered 
his  wife  at  the  back ;  then  he  sliced  her  down  the  back 
with  a  knife.  Naturally,  "Ouch!"  he  was  told. 

There  was  a  smile  on  the  face  of  his  visitor.  "Pray, 
let  me,  Nanabushu !"  he  was  told  (by  the  visitor).  Now, 
therefore,  when  (Nanabushu)  was  asked  for  the  knife,  this 
he  was  told:  "Do,  Nanabushu!"  he  was  told.  "Please  let 
me,  Nanabushu  !"  he  was  told. 

When  (Nanabushu)  gave  him  the  knife,  then  was  his  wife 
sliced  down  the  back,  and  so  not  a  whit  did  she  wince. 
What  was  cut  from  her  was  her  fat.  When  the  fat  was 
cut  from  her,  "Now,  Nanabushu,  therefore  now  do  you 


304 

mli/u  ajitclba/kwan,"  udigon.      Ajro'da'pinaminit    48i/u  a'ka- 
lkanja    ajisinagwanaminit    ri'ma    pi'kwananing    Ini/u  wlwan. 
Cigwa  pasigwlwan,  "Mrru,  Nanabucu,  ta'i'ciwlsiniwag  kinlt- 
canisag,"    udigowan.      Mlsa    gaga't    a'pana    misa7    ka/a-ni- 
5   madcanit  !nix  piwitamiwan. 
Mlsa7  cigwa  wlsiniwat. 

35.  NANABUSHU  AND  THE  WOODPECKER^ 

Cigwa    pa'kadawag    a'pidci,    mlsa7  acimadcat  Nanabucu. 

Cigwa,  mlnawa  udiciwa.    Mlsa7  mlnawa  acinawat  anicinaba8, 

nlciwa8    unldcanisini.      Kawln    kago    wabandamawasm ;  wa- 

10  'kwagan    Ii8i/u  andanit.      "  Wagutugwanigic  madciwagwan  !w 

inandam. 

"Cigwa,  amndacna  iu  klga*a-siwank  Ia8a/u  kiplwitaminan?" 
Mlsa7    kaga't  cigwa  ujl'tawan  Ini/u  ininiwan  ;  wawaci'5'wan 
uka'tigwaning,    udicicimani   Ini/u  miskosanamanan ;   mlnawa 
15   udontcibitonini  plwabi'k  a'pidci  kacibotani. 

Amc,    unisitawinan    ayawaninig,   mlnangwana  48i/u  ijictci- 

gawat  lni/u  o'kunasanwm  3  cagunanit  i'i'ma  ucangwananing 

anlc  magwagu  klnamadabinit.     Alpl  ka'kici'u'nit,  panimagu 

wandcinawatinanit  Ini/u  mi^tigon  patalkisunit  i'i'ma  andanit ; 

20  nondagusiwan.      "Ku'ku7k,  ku7tkuk!"  inwawan. 


Anic    inabit  Nanabucu,   rnaman   owabaman ;  cigwa  utani 

kwa'kwanibabamani   !ni/u  mi'tigon.      Cigu'ku7  udanikutcisa- 

gawani;  ml'ku  aclgu^waninit  i'i'ma  tclga'tig.    Anlc,  plnicigu 

rrwiti  cpiming  ani'a'yawan,  apl'tcinag  Ini/u  caylgwa  madci- 

25   'kwa'i'gawan.      Mldac  ningutingiku,  ini'kwanininit,  asibanan 

1  For  other  versions  see  Nos.  42  (p.   357)  and   53  (p.  423). 


305 

cook,"  he  was  told.  Taking  up  some  charcoal,  he  rubbed 
(Nanabushu's)  wife  with  it  on  the  back.  Then  rising  to 
his  feet,  "Now,  Nanabushu,  your  children  will  eat,"  they 
were  told.  Thereupon  truly  forthwith  went  the  visitor 
upon  his  way. 

Thereupon  now  did  they  eat. 

35.  NANABUSHU  AND  THE  WOODPECKER. l 

Soon  were  they  much  in  need  of  food,  whereupon  off 
went  Nanabushu.  Now,  again  was  he  a-visiting.  And  so 
again  they  whom  he  saw  seemed  like  people,  (and)  they 
had  two  children.  He  saw  nothing  of  what  they  had ;  a 
long  lodge  they  occupied  for  a  home.  "Wonder  what 
in  the  world  they  eat!"  he  thought. 

"Now,  what  had  we  better  feed  our  visitor ?"  Thereupon 
truly  the  man  began  getting  ready ;  he  painted  himself 
on  the  forehead,  the  kind  of  paint  he  used  was  the  red ; 
furthermore,  he  took  up  a  piece  of  metal,  with  a  very 
keen  edge  due  to  filing. 

Now,  (Nanabushu)  recognized  what  it  was,  for  the  thing 
that  they  did  was  to  put  the  bone-pointed  spear 2  into 
the  nostrils  while  he  was  seated  there.  When  he  had 
finished  painting  himself,  he  suddenly  made  for  a  post 
that  was  standing  there  where  they  lived  •  the  sound  of 
his  cry  could  be  heard:  "Ku/lkuk,  ku''kuk!w  was  his  cry. 

Now,  when  Nanabushu  looked,  he  saw  the  red-head 
(woodpecker) ;  and  (the  bird)  kept  busily  nodding  his  head 
to  see  where  to  find  something  on  the  post.  At  last  he 
began  to  try  pecking  the  post;  and  occasionally,  ceasing 
from  his  work,  he  held  his  head  close  to  the  post.  Now, 
by  degrees  he  began  making  his  way  upward,  every  now 
and  then  he  would  begin  pecking  away.  And  so  by  and 

2  Okunasanwln,  "bone-pointed  spear 5"  literally,  "bone  missile." 
20 — PUBL.    AMER.    ETHN.    SOC.    VOL.    VII. 


306 

pimiba'towan,  misa'  minawa  pajik  pimibisowan.  Misa'  nlnj 
kmisat  'i8i/u  asibana8,  pa/i'jinlsa'kwacimonumt.  Misa'  aci- 
mamonit  rrma  ka/a^tonit  ucangwananing  'i8i/u  plwabi'k. 
Misa7  acigaba'tawint  'ft/u  asibanas ;  cigwa  agwa'a-mawa 
5  tciwisinit.  Mlsa/  cigwax  klwlsinit,  cigwax  kanona :  "Anlc 
mlsa"  ka'ijiklwawitawatwa  kimtcanisag  mini'k  ackwantciga- 
yan,"  kri'na. 


Misa7  minawa,  wanimo'k,  slgirrma  ka'u'ndcicagontaginat 
minawa     lisi/u     uglco'ta*u-nas.       Misax    minawa    animadcat. 

10  Panimagu  madwaplpagi,  "AM"  madwa-i^kitowan.  "Kiwani- 
cigagoma!"  madwai'kitowan.  "Amc,  wagutugwanigic  ?" 
i'kituwan  ininiwan.  Mlnangwana  guca  kaga't  kabunit  48i/u 
uglcota/irna8.  "Wasagu  undciwabinamawi'k.  Kagux  win 
rrwiti  pacoca^kagun,"  udina8  48i/u  unldcanisa8.  "Kaya'ku' 

15  tabiwabinamawag  mri*ma  a'pl  undciwabinamawi'k,"  udina 
'isi/u  unldcanisa8.  Anica7  kaga/t  cigwax  o'o^wldac  udina 
'i8i/u  unldcanisa8:  "Kawln  ningutino  klgabwa  i'guslvva." 


Cigwasa7  kaga/t  udanawra^pagitawawan,  cro7<widac  udina8 
Nanabucu  :  "Kagu7  kawanagunawabinawag."  Mldac  kaga't 
20  ka/rcimlnawat.  Anawi  pimadci  ba'i'tiwag  Igi/u  kwlwicancag 
ka'i'ciinat :  "A'kawa,  i'i'ma  ayayuck !"  O8o7dac  udina8: 
"Kaga'tisa7  kiba'kadamwasa,"  udina8.  "Ml  guca  wini  iu 
pabatacrkawat  Igi/u  kltcikiwan>rwag ;  migu  iu  pimita  papa- 
•o-pagamaganiwat  papatacfkawat  Igi/u  kltcikiwan'i-wag,  lifii/u 


307 

by,  as  he  pecked,  (Nanabushu  saw)  a  raccoon  come  running 
(out),  and  then  another  came  falling  down.  And  so,  after 
killing  the  raccoons,  he  came  down  from  the  post.  There 
upon  he  removed  the  metal  which  he  had  placed  there 
in  his  nose.  And  then  the  raccoons  were  cooked  for 
(Nanabushu) ;  then  they  were  dipped  out  for  him  to  eat. 
And  so  then  was  he  eating  when  he  was  addressed :  "Now, 
therefore,  do  you  carry  back  to  your  children  as  much  as 
you  do  not  eat,"  he  was  told. 

Thereupon  again,  without  being  seen,  he  slipped  his 
mittens  (in  the  balsam  boughs  under  the  mat).  So  then  again 
he  set  out  on  his  way.  After  a  while  he  heard  somebody 
calling  aloud:  "Hey!"  he  heard  some  one  saying.  "You 
have  forgotten  something!"  he  heard  him  say.  "Why, 
what  in  the  world  is  it?"1  said  the  man.  It  was  really 
true  that  where  (Nanabushu)  had  been  were  his  mittens. 
"From  afar  do  you  fling  them  to  him.  Do  not  go  near 
to  him,"  he  said  to  (his  boys).  "And  from  as  far  as  you 
can  throw  is  the  distance  you  fling  them  to  him,"  he  said 
to  his  children.  Now,  really,  for  fun  only  did  he  say  this 
to  his  children :  "  In  no  way  will  he  refrain  from  saying 
something  to  you." 

When  they  were  really  in  earnest  about  throwing  them 
to  him,  then  this  Nanabushu  said  to  them:  "Do  not  fling 
them,  lest  they  become  lost  in  the  snow."  Whereupon 
they  truly  went  and  handed  them  to  him.  In  the  act  of 
starting  to  run  away  were  the  boys  when  (this)  he  said 
to  them:  "Hold,  wait  there!"  And  this  he  said  to  them: 
"Really,  you  must  be  pretty  hungry,"  he  said  to  them. 
"That  is  exactly  the  way  of  your  brothers  wherever  they 
are ;  it  is  grease  that  your  brothers  give  so  bountifully 
wherever  they  are,  the  hard  frozen  grease.  Pray,  when 

1  The  sense  of  the  sentence  is  perhaps  best  conveyed  by  turning  it  into  this  : 
"(I  don't  know)  what  it  can  be  (that  he  has  forgotten)." 


3o8 

maskawatcipimita.  Ambasino,  a'pl  wabang  kosiwa  tapi- 
•rca,"  udina9.  Misa'  anicimadcat.  Tagucing  andawat,  ujl'ta 
mi'tigon ;  ubada'kinan  andawat,  wa/kwagan  ugru  ji'ton 
kaya.  Mldac  agut  lni/u  wiwan:  "Indacka  mlnawa  ka-i'ci- 
5  nawagwan  awiya,"  udigon  Ini/u  wlwan. 


"Amandcigisa7,  acimiwanan  kago  anawi  cictcigayanin  ?" 
udinan  Ini/u  wlwan.  Anlc,  ugru'ninan  kaya  ini/u  usanama- 
nan  kaya  ini/u  ukanasanwln.  Mlsa7  krklcl'tat  caylgwa 
klgitowa8  unldcanisa8 :  "Plwita!"  i'kitowa8. 

10       Anlc  mlsa7  aciplndigaguwat  lni/u  plwitan. 

Mlngwana  dac  Ini/u  maman,  anlc,  mlwanini11  tinowan 
ka'u'disat.  Cigwasa7  oganonan  lni/u  wlwan:  "Anln  dacina 
iu  amba,  kiga'a'siwang  lasa/u  plwita?"  udinan  lni/u  wlwan. 
Cigwa  uganonigon:  "Wagunaci  iu  ayayang  kaglga-i'wayang?" 


15  Anic  unickimigon  lni/u  wiwan.  "Caylgwusa  plstca  unagoc 
4a8a/u  aki'k,"  udinan  mi/u  wiwan.  Misa7  gaga't  'a8a/u  i'kwa 
anagonat  ini/u  udaki'kon.  Anlc,  mlsa7  caylgwa  wawacru't 
Nanabucu,  acimiskunank  'i8i/u  ucangwan.  Anic,  cigwa, 
minawa  ucagwunan  'isi/u  piwabi'k  i'i'ma  acingwanang. 

20  Magwasagu  namadabit  wadcipasingwitcisat  nawatinat  Ini/u 
mi'tigon  kapatalkinat ;  ania'kwantawat.  Cayigwa  nonda- 
gusi:  "Kirku'k,  ku'ku'k,  ku'ku'k,  ku'ku'k,"  inwa.  Cayi- 
gwasa  anic  ka'i'cinawatigu  ijictciga,  cigwasa7  uwipa'kwawan 
ini/u  mi'tigon.  Pitcinag  abiting  ani'kwanit,  acipata'kiskagut, 

25  pana  mi'i-gu  kipimibisu ;  pangicing  panagu  kabi'ti'ku'ka- 
migicing.  Anic,  miskwi  ucangwanang.  Misa7  a'kitonit  ini/u 
upiwitamiwan :  aAnina  iu  mayawibinasiwat?"  ini/u  mawan 
ini/u  i'kwawan. 


3°9 

the  morrow  comes,  let  your  father  come  over,"  he  said  to 
them.  And  then  on  his  way  he  went.  When  he  arrived 
at  where  they  lived,  he  made  ready  for  a  post ;  he  placed 
it  standing  in  (the  place)  where  they  lived,  for  he  too  had 
made  a  long  lodge.  And  this  he  was  told  by  his  wife : 
"No  doubt  but  that  he  must  have  seen  somebody  else 
doing  that,"  he  was  told  by  his  wife. 

"Now,  why  should  you  want  to  dissuade  me  from  some 
thing  I  wish  to  do?"  he  said  to  his  wife.  Now,  he  put  in 
order  for  use  his  paint  and  his  bone  spear.  And  so  by 
the  time  he  was  ready,  then  said  his  children?  "A  visitor!" 
they  said. 

So  thereupon  in  where  they  were  came  the  visitor. 

It  happened  to  be  the  red-head,  why,  the  very  same 
one  whom  he  had  visited.  Then  he  spoke  to  his  wife, 
saying:  "Why  is  it,  pray,  we  don't  feed  the  guest?"  he 
said  to  his  wife.  Then  he  was' answered  :  "What  on  earth 
have  we  to  feed  him?" 

Naturally  he  was  angered  by  his  wife  (for  speaking  so). 
"Now,  you  hang  up  the  kettle,"  he  said  to  his  wife. 
Thereupon  truly  the  woman  hung  up  her  kettle.  So  it 
was  then  that  Nanabushu  began  painting  himself,  painting 
his  nose  red.  Now,  then,  next  he  stuck  the  metal  in  his 
nose.  And  while  seated,  up  from  there  he  leaped,  seizing 
the  post  that  he  had  put  up ;  on  up  the  post  he  went. 
Presently  he  was  heard  uttering:  "Ku'ku'k,  ku'ku'k,  ku'ku'k, 
ki^ku'k!"  (such)  was  the  cry  he  uttered.  Now,  what  he  had 
previously  seen  them  do  he  was  doing  now,  he  was  now 
pecking  the  post.  At  the  first  peck  he  made,  he  was 
pierced  by  the  metal,  whereupon  down  he  fell;  when  he 
fell,  he  struck  the  ground  with  a  thud.  Well,  his  nose 
was  bleeding.  Thereupon  said  their  visitor:  "Why  do 
you  not  lift  and  set  him  up?"  was  what  he  said  to  the 
woman. 


3io 

Mlsa'  gaga't  ajimayawibinat  'asa/a  i'kwa.  Oo*widac 
udigon  Ini/u  plwitamiwan:  "Udickunan  mawln  Ini/u  usana- 
manan.  Ambasino,  pic,"  udigon.  Mldac  gaga't,  acimmat, 
acimiskunamit  'isi/u  uskaltiguni.  Mlnawa  utibabandamo- 
5  wanini  kaglcagunank  ima  cingwanang.  Kaga't,  ajiwl'ku- 
bitawat,  aciminat  Ini/u  plwitamiwan. 

Magwagu      namadabinit,      panimagu     undcinondagusinit 

maman ;  acinawatinanit  Ini/u  mi'tigon,   mlsa/  utanikwa  kwa- 

nibabamani,    andigwa'ku   anigakwatikwa'i'gawan.      Cigwasa 

10  madi'kwa'i-garwan,     asibanan     klpimibisowan,    aca    mlnawa 

pacig ;   misa  n!nj   klnisanit,   pa'i'cinlsa'kucimonanit. 

Amc,  mi  iu  cigwa  kimi'kawit  Nanabucu,  udigon:  "Mi  iu 
ta'i'ciwlsiniyu'k  kinldcanisag,"  udigon.  Mlsax  gaga't  anici- 
madcanit,  misana  kiwisiniwat. 


36.    NANABUSHU  is  MIRACULOUSLY  FED  BEAR-GREASE.] 

15  Ningutingiku  mlnawa  a'pidci  pa'kudawat;  paba'a'yat, 
mlnawa  plwita8  2  udodisa8,  ml  gayabi  nlnciwae  abinotclya8. 
Mlsax  mlnawa  cigwa  wfkiga/rnt.  Misax  a'kidunit :  "Wa- 
gunac  kaglga'a'nk?"  i'kitowas.  "  1AU,  igickana  kislnan  lisi/u 
unagan,  mi'tigunagan." 


20  Misa7  gaga't  acigismamowint.  Magwagu  kinamadapinit 
lni/u  ininiwan,  panimagu  wandcinawatinaminit  48i/u  utabacini ; 
mldac  anwanit :  ftSa  sa  sa  sa !"  inwawan.  Mldac  rrma 
upimita'kupitcikaniwang  aji'a-gosinit,  aciwacananit  Ini/u 
uniciwani.  Migosidac  uda'kunamini,  nondagusiwan  :  "Sank, 

1  See  Nos.  40  (p.  341)  and  52  (p.  421). 


Thereupon  truly  the  woman  lifted  and  set  him  up. 
And  this  she  was  told  by  their  visitor:  "Doubtless  he  may 
have  left  unused  some  of  his  paint.  Pray,  give  it  to  me," 
she  was  told.  And  so  truly,  when  she  gave  it  to  him,  he 
painted  the  forehead  (of  her  husband)  red.  Furthermore, 
she  examined  what  he  had  stuck  into  his  nose.  Truly, 
when  she  pulled  it  out,  she  then  gave  it  to  their  visitor. 

And  while  seated,  of  a  sudden  the  red-head  began 
calling ;  when  he  seized  the  post,  he  examined  place  after 
place  as  if,  as  he  went  along,  he  was  testing  where  to 
peck.  Presently,  when  beginning  to  peck,  a  raccoon  came 
tumbling  out,  then  later  another ;  whereupon,  on  killing 
two  of  them,  he  then  came  down  from  the  post. 

Well,  so  when  back  to  consciousness  came  Nanabushu, 
he  was  told :  "Therefore  do  you  and  your  children  eat," 
he  was  told.  Thereupon  truly  when  the  other  set  forth 
on  his  way,  then  did  they  eat. 

36.  NANABUSHU  is  MIRACULOUSLY  FED  BEAR-GREASE. l 

And  another  time  they  were  very  much  in  want  of  food ; 
while  wandering  about,  to  some  other  strangers 2  did  he 
come,  and  they  also  had  two  children.  And  now  again 
was  he  to  be  fed.  So  this  they  said:  "What  have  we  to 
feed  him?"  they  said.  "Well,  then  you  had  better  cleanse 
the  vessel,  the  wooden  vessel." 

Thereupon  truly  she  cleansed  it  for  him.  Now,  while 
the  man  was  seated,  suddenly  from  where  he  was  he 
grabbed  his  lodge-pole ;  and  then  he  uttered  the  cry : 
"Sa  sa  sa  sa !"  (such)  was  the  cry  he  made.  And  so 
upon  the  cross-pole  (over  the  fire)  he  went  (and)  perched, 
holding  his  testes  in  such  way  that  they  bulged  out  solid. 
And  with  an  awl  in  his  hand,  he  could  be  heard  saying: 

2  Plwltae,  "strangers."  The  usual  meaning  of  this  word  is  "visitor"  or  "guest;" 
i.e.,  one  to  whom  one  renders  hospitality. 


3I2 

sank,  sank!"  inwawan.  Mlsa'  mlgu  cro'dac  andasanonda- 
gusit  nimawat  Ini/u  uniciciwan.  Ningutingiku  acipacipawat, 
panagu  pimita  kaslgisanik,  ma'kupimita.  Mlsa'  cigwa 
mockinabmi  48i/u  mi'tigunagan.  Acinlsandawanit,  acra'ca- 
5  mint l  48i/u  pimita. 

Anlc,  misa'  klwlsinit.  Cigwa  mlnawa  ina :  "Ka/rckwan- 
taman,  kim'tcanisag  anikikiwawi'ta11,"  krrna. 

Mlsax    mlnawa,    animo'k,   i'i'ma  ka/ijicagwantaginat  4ci/u 
uglco'ta'U'na8.   Cigwa7  anijimadcat,  oglnondawan  tablbaginit: 
10   "A*,  kiwanicigagima !w 

"Taga,  inabiwi'k  rrwiti  kagi'tanabit." 
Inagwanadac  kaga't  ka'a'binit  ugico'ta/cxna8. 

"Wasagu7  undciwabinamawi'k.  Kawln  ingutino  kibwa- 
•i-guslwa.  Wasagu  undciwabinamawi'k." 

15        Cigwasa7  gaga't  udanuwra^'pagitawawan. 
"Ca,  ca,  ca,  plni'kigu !" 

Mlsa7  gagalt  aniwipimatclba'i'tiwa8  lisi/u  abinotciya8,  aji- 
kanonat :  "  Klpa'ka'tamwasa  klnawa.  Wabang  kosiwa 
taplca." 

20  Anlc,  migu  mlnawa  tagwicin  andawat.  Anlc  mlna  mi- 
nawa  kiwlsininit  unidcanisa8.  Misa7  cigwa7  krirci'tod  mi'ti- 
gunagans.  Anlc,  caylgwa  piklgitowa8  unidcanisa8:  "Plwita!" 
i'kitowa8.  Anlc  pindigawan  piwitamiwan,  cigwa  uganonan 
lni/u  wlwan :  "Ambagickana,  wagunacwina  ayayang  pa- 

25    'kanag?" 

"Mimawln  a1  tana  48i/u  ayayang  kaglgawang  Ii8i/u  pimita." 

1  Aci'a'camint,  "he  gave  the  grease"  (to  Nanabushu)  to  eat;  literally,  "they  gave 
it  to  him  to  eat,"  or,  more  literally,  "he  was  given  it  to  eat." 


313 

"Sank,  sank,  sank!"  (such)  was  what  he  uttered.  And  in 
time  with  each  of  these  words  he  aimed  a  blow  at  his 
testes.  By  and  by  he  pricked  them  gently  with  the  point, 
and  straightway  out  flowed  the  grease,  bear-grease.  And 
so  in  a  while  full  was  the  wooden  vessel.  Then,  climbing 
down,  he  gave  the  grease  (to  Nanabushu)  to  eat.1 

Well,  and  so  he  ate.  Then  again  he  was  told:  "What 
you  fail  to  eat  up,  then  back  home  to  your  children  do 
you  take,"  he  was  told. 

Thereupon  again,  when  no  one  was  looking,  (in  among 
the  balsam  boughs 2)  did  he  put  his  mittens.  When  on 
his  way,  he  could  hear  the  sound  of  some  one  calling  to 
him  in  the  distance:  "Hey!  you  have  forgotten  something." 

"Do  you  look  there  where  he  sat." 

And  so  it  was  true  that  there  where  he  had  sat  were 
his  mittens. 

"From  afar  do  you  throw  them  to  him.  He  will  not 
refrain  from  saying  something  to  you.  From  afar  do  you 
throw  them  to  him." 

By  and  by  they  tried  throwing  them  to  him. 

"Wait,  wait,  wait,  wait,  just  you  fetch  them  to  me!" 

Thereupon  truly  on  their  way  back  did  the  children 
start  to  run,  when  he  spoke  to  them,  saying:  "You  people 
surely  must  be  in  want  of  food.  To-morrow  let  your  father 


come  over." 


Well,  accordingly  again  was  he  come  at  home.  So 
again  did  his  poor  children  eat.  And  then  in  time  he 
made  a  wooden  vessel.  Now,  presently  hither  came  his 
children,  saying:  "A  visitor!"  they  said.  So  when  in  came 
their  guest,  he  then  spoke  to  his  wife,  saying:  "Well,  now, 
what  else  have  we  that  is  different?" 

"The  only  thing  we  have  to  feed  him  is  the  grease." 

2  Under  the   mat,  as  a  bedding. 


3H 

"  'Au,  ambagickana,  kislnan  iu  mi'tiguna^gans,"  udinan 
Ini/u  wlwan. 

"Kagatsa  kitaiyawina'ku  iu  a/r'kitoyan.  Anti  ka'irn- 
tinamang  lisi/u  pimita  kagiga/a'wayang?"  udinan.  Anlc, 
5  unickiman. 

1AU !  magwasagu  kmamadabit  Nanabucu,  pamagu  wandci- 
nawatinang  48i/u  udabanc ;  kawln  kijinja7  kaski'irsl  ani'a*- 
lkwantawat.  Wi'ka  mina7  kaski'o*  i'i'ma  ubimida'kupitci- 
ganiwang.  Cigwasa7  klwanagosi.  "  l A'a/u,  mindimoya ! 
10  Naska  a'ton  cibaiyaT  lisi/u  mi'tigunagan."  Acigitcipinat 
Ini/u  uniciciwan,  aciwacanat.  Misa/  acinanlmawat  nondagusit. 
"Sank,  sank,  sank,  sank!"  inwat.  Ningutingiku  acipacipawat, 
klbimibiso. 


Klgitowan  Ini/u  upiwitamiwan :  "Agwawabini'k!     Awana- 
15   nlwinan    dac    win    a8a/u    a'rndit    wrkagickaku    Nanabucu!" 
Misa7  acagwawabinigut  mi/u  uplwitaman.    Cigwa  kigitowan : 
"Taga  kislnan  iu  mi'tigunagan," 

Kaga't  laca/u  i'kwa  uglkisman. 

"A'ton  ima  clbaiya'i',"  utigon.    Panimagu  wantcra'lkwan- 

20  dawasanit     mi/u     piwitamiwan,     adcitarnon     nondagusiwan : 

"Sank,    sank,    sank,  sank!"     Misax  antotaminit ;  wacananit 

Ini/u  uniciciwani,  acipacibawanit;  panagu7  ma'kupimita  kasl- 

gitciwaninik.     Kawin    kanaga   waya/u  acimockinablnik   lisi/u 

mi*tigunagan.     "  1AU,''  udigon  kanisandawanit.     "Nanabucu, 

25   mri/<u    taciwisiniyu'k    kinltcanisag,"    udigon.      Misa7    anici- 

madcanit. 


Misana  mmawa  kiwlsininit  lisi/u  unldcanisa8. 


315 

"Very  well,  come  on,  cleanse  the  little  bowl!"  he  said 
to  his  wife. 

"Truly  do  I  dislike  you  for  what  you  are  always  saying. 
Where  shall  we  get  the  grease  with  which  to  feed  him  ?" 
she  said  to  him.  Well,  she  angered  him. 

How  now !  for  while  Nanabushu  was  seated,  he  suddenly 
seized  the  lodge-pole  from  where  he  was ;  but  he  was  not 
able  to  go  nimbly  up  the  pole.  After  a  long  while  was 
the  poor  thing  able  to  reach  his  place  on  the  cross-pole. 
At  last  he  was  perched  aloft.  "All  right  now,  old  woman! 
See  that  you  place  the  wooden  bowl  directly  underneath 
(me)."  On  taking  out  his  testes,  he  squeezed  them  till  he 
held  them  bulging  tight.  And  so  every  time  he  aimed 
as  if  to  hit  them,  he  was  heard  to  say:  "Sank,  sank,  sank, 
sank!"  (such)  was  the  sound  he  made.  And  when  he 
suddenly  pricked  them,  down  he  came  falling. 

Then  said  their  guest :  "Jerk  him  out  (of  the  fire) ! 
What  a  fool  Nanabushu  must  be  to  be  ever  trying  to  do 
what  (he  sees)  others  do !"  Thereupon  he  was  pulled  out 
(of  the  fire)  by  his  guest.  Then  he  said:  "Do  cleanse 
the  wooden  vessel." 

The  woman  truly  cleansed  it. 

"Put  it  there  beneath  (me),"  she  was  told.  Suddenly 
from  where  he  was  the  guest  went  skipping  up,  the  Squirrel 
could  be  heard  saying:  "Sank,  sank,  sank,  sank!"  There 
upon  he  did  as  before  :  holding  his  testes  so  as  to  bulge 
out  solid,  he  pierced  them;  forthwith  some  bear-grease 
came  flowing  out.  It  was  but  a  moment  when  full  was 
the  wooden  vessel.  "Now,  then!"  (Nanabushu)  was  told 
when  the  guest  was  come  down  from  the  pole.  "Nana 
bushu,  therefore  will  you  and  your  children  now  eat,"  he 
was  told.  And  then  away  went  (the  visitor). 

So  again  his  poor  children  had  food  to  eat. 


3i6 

37.    NANABUSIIU  AND  THE  MALLARD.1 

Anic,  caylgwa  mlnawa  pa'kada  Nanabucu.  Ningutingiku 
mlnawa  udotisan  anicinaba9,  ml  kayabi  nPciwa8  unitcani- 
sinini.  Mlsax  aniTnabit,  "Wagutugwan  madclwagwan  ?" 
inandam. 

5        Cigwa  klgitowan  Ini/u  ininiwan  :    "Ambasino,  unagota'ki- 
lkwan,"  inimawan  Ini/u  i'kwawan. 

Misax  gaga't  anagota'ki'kwawan  lni/u  i'kwawan.  Cigwa 
wawaci'o'wan  mrwininiwan  ucawasko'o'sanamanan,  uwlnga 
ustigwanining  udicicimanini.  Cigwasax  kl'kiciowan.  Mag- 

10  wagu  kinamadabinit,  panimagu,  wandcinondagusinit :  "Kwlc, 
kwlc,  kwlc,  kwic!"  inwawan.  Undcipasigwaowan  ininiciban3 
acipomnit  i'i'ma  ubimita'kupitciganiwang,  nondagusiwan : 
"Kwlc,  kwlc,  kwlc,  kwlc!"  inwawan.  Owawabaman  misinit 
pa'kic  klgitowan:  a 'O,  'o,  'o,  rnindimoya!  ana/a'n,"  udinan. 

15   Anic    ml  a'pana  misinit,  "  1O,  lo,  'o,  mindimoya !  ana/a^n." 


Misax  gaga't  onondan  Nanabucu  manomin  madwaatiwan- 
tanik.  Cigwasa7  pangutani,  acinlsipomnt.  "Awisa^  mri/<u 
ka'i'ciwisiniyamban,  Nanabucu,"  ina'.  "Skwantcigayan,  kinl- 
tcanisag  kitakiwawitawag." 

20  Mlsax  gaga't,  cigwa  wrklwat,  mlnawa  acicangwantaginat 
mri/>u  ugico'ta'o'nac.  Panimagu  mlnawa  madwablbagit. 
"'Ou!"  madwaplpagi. 


"Nanabucu  kagowi'kitotug,"  udinan.      "Kaga't,  kiwanici- 
gaguma !      Taga,  inabiwi'k  i'i'witi  gagltanabit." 

1  For  another  version  see  No.  41   (p.   351). 


37-   NANABUSHU  AND  THE  MALLARD. * 

Well,  already  was  Nanabushu  again  becoming  hungry. 
And  one  other  time  he  came  to  some  people,  and  they 
also  had  two  children.  And  now,  as  he  looked  about, 
"What  in  the  world  must  they  have  to  eat?"  he  thought. 

Presently  said  the  man:  "Please  do  you  go  and  hang 
up  the  kettle,"  he  said  to  the  t  woman. 

Thereupon  truly  the  woman  went  and  hung  up  the  kettle. 
Presently  the  man  painted  himself  with  a  green  color,  all 
around  over  his  head  did  he  put  it.  In  time  he  was  done 
with  painting  himself.  And  while  yet  seated,  and  of  a 
sudden,  he  started  forth  from  the  place,  uttering:  "Kwlsh, 
kwlsh,  kwlsh,  kwlsh !"  (such)  was  the  sound  of  his  voice. 
Up  flew  a  Mallard  2  that  alighted  yonder  on  the  cross-pole, 
he  was  heard  saying:  "Kwlsh,  kwlsh,  kwlsh,  kwlsh!"  J^such) 
was  the  sound  of  his  voice.  (Nanabushu)  observed  him 
muting,  while  at  the  same  time  (he  heard  him)  saying : 
"Ho,  ho,  ho,  old  woman!  keep  it  stirring,"  he  said  to  her. 
And  all  the  while  (the  Mallard)  muted,  (he  was  saying): 
"Ho,  ho,  ho,  old  woman!  keep  it  stirring." 

Thereupon  Nanabushu  truly  heard  the  sound  of  his  rice 
boiling.  When  it  was  boiled,  then  down  from  aloft  came 
(the  Mallard).  "Now,  therefore  shall  you  eat,  Nanabushu," 
he  was  told.  "What  you  do  not  eat,  then  to  your  children 
may  you  take." 

Thereupon  truly,  while  about  to  return,  he  again  put  his 
mittens  (in  among  the  balsam  boughs).  And  later  on  he 
was  again  heard  calling  with  a  loud  voice:  "Oh!"  he  was 
heard  calling  out. 

"Nanabushu  may  want  to  say  something  (to  you),"  (the 
Mallard)  said  to  (his  children).  "Truly,  he  has  forgotten 
something !  Now  look  yonder  where  he  sat !" 

2  Ininiciban,   "mallard;"   literally,  "man-duck." 


Mlsa'  gaga't  kra'biwa8  'isi/u  ugico'ta'irna8. 
"  'Ugapinawa8  nindocimag,'  ta'r'kito.      Wasagu  undciwa- 
binamawi'k.     Kawln  ningutino  kibwa/rguslwa." 

Mlsa'     gaga't,     wasagu    udanawi'u'ndciwabinamawawan, 
5   mlsa'  anat:   "Ic,  pimiciciyu'kiku!"  udina8.    Mlsa7  gaga't  Igi/u 
kwlwisansag  awlcimmawat. 

"Ic,"    udina8,     "ambasino    a'pi    wabang    kosiwa    tapica ! 
Kipa'katamwasa  klnawa." 

Anlc  mlsa7,  gaga't,  wayabaninig  ijanit  !ni/u  ininiwan.    Anlc 
10  mri''"  paprirt  Nanabucu.     Cigwa  madwaklgitowa8 :  "A'e'e7, 
piwita!"  madwa'i''kitowat.     Cigwasa7  plndigawan. 

Cigwa    uganonan    Ini/u  wlwan :    u  Amba,   kackana,  anago 
taki'kwan !   mlsana  cigwa   tciglgaanguban  'a8a/u  plwita." 

Mltaclzan  agut  !ni/u  wlwan:   "Wagunan  tana  iu  kiglga-i'- 
15   wayanguban !"  udigon  Ini/u  wlwan. 

"  Amantcisa7  win  'i8i/u  kri-'kitoyan  kago  aninanin  !   Pisanigu 
unagoc  o  a'ki'k !"  udinan. 


Kaga't  anago'taki'kwani  a-i-'kwa.  Odontcimataciman 
ucawaskosanamanan ;  aciwawaci'irt,  aci'O'cawaskwanang 

20  'isi/u  ustigwan.  Cigwa  klklci'u* ;  magwasagu  klnamadabit, 
panimagu,  undcipasiguntcisat.  "Kwlc,  kwic,  kwic,  kwlc!" 
inwat.  Kawln  ml  nayanj.  kaski*opsl  mri'ma  anawri'cat 
upimi'ta'kupitciganiwang-  •  wl'kasa  kaski'o*.  Cigwasa7  krcv- 
nagos!  i*i*ma  agotcininit  uda'kikowan,  nondagusi :  "Kwlc, 

25   kwic,  kwlc,  kwlc !"      Anlc  uganawabamawan  agosinit,  kaga- 


And  there  truly  were  his  mittens. 

"  'My  nephews  may  fetch  them,'  he  will  say.  And  from 
a  distance  shall  you  fling  them  to  him.  He  will  not  avoid 
saying  something  to  you." 

Thereupon  truly,  when  from  afar  they  intended  throwing 
them  to  him,  he  then  said  to  them:  "Oh,  come  give  them 
to  me!"  he  said  to  them.  And  so  truly  the  boys  went 
and  gave  them  to  him. 

"I  say,"  he  said  to  them,  "would  that  when  to-morrow 
is  here,  your  father  might  come  over !  You  (people)  must 
be  in  want  of  food." 

So  thereupon,  truly,  on  the  morrow  thither  went  the  man. 
Naturally  in  waiting  was  Nanabushu.  Presently  he  heard 
them  say:  "Halloo!  a  visitor!"  (Thus)  he  heard  them  say. 
Then  presently  in  he  came. 

Then  (Nanabushu)  said  to  his  wife:  "Oh,  for  goodness' 
sake,  do  hang  up  the  kettle !  for  it  is  our  duty  to  feed 
the  visitor." 

Thereupon  he  was  told  by  his  wife:  "For  mercy's  sake, 
what  have  we  to  feed  him!"  he  was  told  by  his  wife. 

"What  possesses  you  to  talk  that  way  whenever  I  tell 
you  to  do  something !  Simply  go  on  and  hang  up  this 
kettle!"  he  said  to  her. 

The  woman  truly  hung  up  the  kettle.  He  had  his 
green  paint  spread  out ;  in  painting  himself  he  colored  his 
head  green.  Presently  he  was  done  painting  himself;  and 
while  seated,  and  of  a  sudden,  up  he  sprang.  "Kwlsh, 
kwlsh,  kwlsh,  kwlsh!"  was  the  sound  he  uttered.  It  was 
a  long  while  before  he  was  able  to  get  to  yonder  cross- 
pole  ;  he  was  a  long  while  getting  there.  Finally  he  was 
perched  over  the  place  where  hung  their  kettle,  he  could 
be  heard  (uttering):  "Kwlsh,  kwlsh,  kwlsh,  kwlsh!"  Now 
they  watched  him  perched  aloft,  with  his  anus  opening 
and  closing.  He  was  not  able,  with  all  his  efforts,  to  ease 


320 

gwantciskanik  utcltlni.  Kawln  ugaski'toslni  anawi  mislt  ; 
wi'kasa'  pimipitani  umowancic. 

"Niya,  eM"  udigon  Ini/u  wiwan. 

Anic,  a'pana  aninawagi'kwaninit  Ini/u  uplwitamiwan,  anic 
5  gagicipawantciwantanig  'isi/u  umowancic.  Misa'  intawa 
acinisantawat  Nanabucu. 

"Taga,     pic     kiwawaci'u-n,"     udigon    Ini/u    plwitamiwan. 
"Taga,  awigislblgin  kita'ki'kowa,"  udinan. 

Anic  mlsa/  gaga't  caylgwa  ki'kislbiginat.     Aci*a'nagotot 
10  pa'kanatinik  'isi/u  nibi. 


7  klwawaci'u'nit  !ni/u  piwitamiwan,  anic  cigwa  non- 
dagusiwan  ininiciban,  ajiponlnit  upimita'kupitciganiwang. 
Anic  misa7  cigwa  mlslnit,  panagu  manomin  kaslslgipitanig. 
Cigwasa/  mockinawan  uda'ki'kowan,  acininlsiponmit.  Mlsa7 
15  a'kitunit  :  "Nanabucu,  mri/>u,  ta'i'ciwlsiniyu'k  kimtcanisag," 
ina. 

Anic  mlsa/  cigwax  ka'a'nimadcanit,  mlsana  klwisininit  48i/u 
unldcanisa8. 

38.  NANABUSHU  is  GIVEN  POWER  BY  THE  SKUNK,  BUT 

WASTES  IT. 

Cigwa*  mlnawa   madca  babamusat.      Ningutingiku  saga- 

20  *i'gan   umada'kan,   owabama  ki'kinantawanas  l  pata'kisunit. 

Midac  anantank:  "Anicinabag  inangwana  ayawag,"  inantam. 

Animadcat.      Cigwa    kaga't   owabandan  twa/i'gan  wanta'i'- 

plnit;     mosotclt     watwa'i'baninit,     kagatsa     mi^ca'kwatini. 


1  Ki'-kinantawan,  "balsam."  This  is  an  old  word  seldom  used  in  conversation; 
it  means  "the  one  that  spots  the  place"  (where  water  is).  The  more  usual  word  is 
cingup,  which,  however,  refers  to  any  kind  of  fir-tree. 


321 

himself;  but  after  a  long  while  there  fell  a  miserable 
droplet  of  dung. 

"Oh,   oh!"  he  was  told  by  his  wife. 

Now,  down  at  once  their  visitor  lowered  his  head,  for 
round  about  in  the  boiling  water  whirled  (Nanabushu's) 
sorry  droplet  of  dung.  So  then  accordingly  down  climbed 
Nanabushu. 

"Pray,  give  me  your  paint,"  he  was  told  by  their  guest. 
"Now,  go  wash  your  kettle,"  he  said  (to  the  old  woman). 

So  it  was  true  that  soon  she  had  finished  with  washing 
(her  kettle).  Then  she  hung  up  the  kettle  with  a  different 
kind  of  water. 

And  when  their  visitor  was  done  painting  himself,  then 
began  the  sound  of  the  Mallard,  who  then  was  alighting 
upon  their  cross-pole.  So  thereupon  he  began  muting, 
and  forthwith  some  rice  came  pouring  out.  When  their 
kettle  began  to  fill,  then  down  he  alighted.  Thereupon 
he  said:  "Nanabushu,  therefore  now  shall  your  children 
have  enough  to  eat,"  (such)  was  said  (to  Nanabushu). 

Well,  so  then  upon  his  way  he  went,  and  accordingly 
did  (Nanabushu's)  poor  children  eat. 

38.   NANABUSHU  is  GIVEN  POWER  BY  THE  SKUNK,  BUT 

WASTES  IT. 

Soon  again  he  was  off  travelling  afoot.  When  once 
out  upon  the  ice  of  a  lake  he  came,  he  saw  a  balsam  l 
standing.  And  this  he  thought:  "Some  people,  no  doubt, 
are  living  there,"  he  thought.  On  his  way  he  continued. 
Presently  he  truly  saw  a  hole  (in  the  ice)  from  which  they 
drew  water ;  with  the  anal  gut  of  a  moose  had  they  made 
the  hole,  exceedingly  large  was  the  vesicle.  Great  was  his 
desire  for  it.  When  he  laid  hands  on  it,  he  heard  the 

21 — PUBL.    AMER.    ETHN.    SOC.    VOL.    VII. 


322 

Kagatsa    umisawinan.     Ajro'da'pinang,    madwakanonigon : 
"Ic,   Nanabucu!  poni'ton   Ii8i/u.     Klgasanagi'a',''  l  udigon. 

Misa'  gaga't  intawa  ajipagitinank.     "Oma  plj an !"  udigon. 
Mlsa'  gaga't  kaniciku'plt,  cigwasa7  uglga'i'gon,  misax  wlsinit. 
5   Anawiwlskuntciga  Nanabucu.      "Migu7  ga'kina  icimltcin  mi 
aji'a'caminan,"  udigon. 

Mlsa7  gaga't  ga'kina  acimldcit.      Uwabaman  gaga't  min- 
ditowan    cigwa    uganonigon.      "Nanabucu,    intigu  kuca  ki- 
pa'kada." 
10        "Kawln,"  udinan. 

"Kawln,  Nanabucu,  kipa'kadasagu.     Kigi'kanimin  pa'ka- 
dayan.     Panglns  kiwlcawanimin,  wandci'i'ninan,"  udigon. 

"Ayefi,  nistclmista,  gaga't  nimba'kada,"  udinan. 

"Amc,    mlsa7  cigwax  tciki'kino-a'monan  kadicictcigayan," 

15   udigon.      Ommigon  bibigwans.      "Mlsa7  o  kagabatci'toyan," 

udigon.      "Migu7    o  tci'a'nikiwayan  tci'o'ci'tot  kimindimo'i*- 

mic     wa'kwagan ;     manogu    taginonda.       Mldac    klklci'tot, 

o'o'widac    kiwlmmin    ka'u'ndcinanatwa    lgi/u    kapmdigawat 

ima  kiwa'kwaganing.      Mlgu7  iu  aciki'kino'a'monan,  o^Mac 

20  kiga'i-cictciga,"    udigon.      Mlnangwana    mi/u    micicigagwan 

kaganonigut.     "Nlcing  tciabatci'toyan  kiwlmmin  4i8i/u  ka/u*n- 

dcinanatwa,"  udigon.     "Tcigwasa7  taga  tcangitiyacinan,"  ina 

laVu  Nanabucu. 


Misa7,    kaga't,    cigwa7    kitcangitiya'kisut.     Cigwasa7  ima 
25   ijitiyaniwan      aji'a'cawipogititamagut.        Mlsa7      kato'tagut. 
ugri'gon  :    "Ambasino,  iyangwamisin,   Nanabucu," 


1  Klgasanagi'a',  "you  will  put  us  in  want  for  another;"  literally,  "you  will  render 
it  difficult"   (to  replace). 


323 

voice  of  some  one  speaking  to  him:  "Hold,  Nanabushu! 
do  you  let  that  alone.  You  will  put  us  in  want  for  an 
other,"  he  l  was  told. 

Thereupon  truly  he  chose  to  leave  it  be.  "Come  hither!" 
he  was  told.  It  was  true  that  when  he  went  up  from  the 
lake,  then  was  he  given  food,  whereupon  he  ate.  It  was 
the  purpose  of  Nanabushu  to  save  (some  of)  the  food. 
"Just  you  eat  all  that  I  have  set  before  you,"  he  was  told. 

And  so  actually  the  whole  of  it  he  ate.  He  saw  that 
really  big  was  the  one  who  now  was  speaking  to  him. 
"Nanabushu,  it  really  seems  as  if  you  were  hungry." 

"No,"  he  said  to  him. 

"Nay,  Nanabushu,  but  you  are  really  hungry.  I  know  that 
you  are  hungry.  That  a  little  mercy  I  may  bestow  upon 
you,  is  my  reason  for  speaking  thus  to  you,"  he  was  told. 

"Yes,  my  younger  brother,  truly  hungry  am  I,"  he  said 
to  him. 

"Well,  therefore  then  will  I  teach  you  what  you  shall 
do,"  he  was  told.  He  was  given  a  small  flute.  "Now, 
this  is  what  you  shall  use,"  he  was  told.  "That  when 
you  go  back  home,  then  shall  your  old  woman  make  a 
long  lodge ;  let  it  be,  oh,  a  long  one.  And  when  she 
has  finished  it,  then  this  do  I  wish  to  give  you,  so  that 
with  it  you  may  kill  them  that  come  into  your  long  lodge. 
So  accordingly  as  I  instruct  you,  thus  shall  you  do,"  he 
was  told.  It  happened  to  be  the  Big  Skunk  that  was 
addressing  him.  "I  intend  to  give  you  the  means  of  using 
twice  what  you  are  to  use  in  killing  them,"  he  was  told. 
"Then  go  you  down  upon  your  hands  and  knees,"  Nana 
bushu  was  told. 

And  so,  truly,  he  then  got  down  on  his  hands  and  knees. 
Presently  from  the  other  direction  faced  the  rear  (of  the 
Skunk),  who  broke  wind  into  (Nanabushu).  Such  was  what 
(Nanabushu)  had  done  to  him.  And  this  was  he  told : 


324 

ugri'gon ;  "klgaTniga/a-g  kinltcanisag,"  krrna.  "Naska- 
guta  ka/rcictcigayan  kra/nitagwicinan  antayan ;  kajinonda- 
gwamo'toyan  oso/u  kibabigwan,  mldacigu  kaciplndigawat 
mosog  48i'u  kiwa'kwagan.  Nlbawadacigu  pindigawat,  'o^o7 
5  ta'i'cictcigawag,  kiwi'tacagamawag  i'i'ma  tciwa'kwaganing. 
Mlsa7  pisaga-a/nk  au  naganlt,  mra'lpl  kapogitiyan  ;  tcipin- 
dcipogitiyan  'isi/u  „  tciwa'kwagan.  Mldac  ga'kina  ka'i'cini- 
buwat  rrwiti  pindik  ayawat.  Misa7  tciwavvlsiniyan.  Mlnawa 
klgitamatwa,  inlnawa  klganontagamatawag.  Mlsa7  tciwa- 
10  baniciyan,  kawm  kayabi  kigapa'kadasl.  Misax  iu  ajiki'ki- 
no'a-monan,"  udigon. 


Cigwasa7  animadca  Nanabucu,  gagatsa7  wawicantam. 
Ningutingiku,  anipapimusat,  gagatsa7  kistcimi'tigon  owaba- 
man.  "Kuniga  indabimigutuk  niclmisa7  kagrrcit!"  inandam. 
15  "Taga,  ningapogitcina,"  inantam  'aca/u  Nanabucu.  Mlsa7 
gaga't  ajipogitcinat  Ini/u  ki4tcimiltigon,  migu  iu  ajipigiski- 
sanit.  "  M11^  minangwana  gaga/t  tabimit  'a^a711  nislmisa7 
kagri'cit,"  inantam. 


Misax    papimusat    ningutingiku,   mmawa  owabaman  aga- 

20  matci/u    ki'tci'a'sinm    abinit        "Taga7,    kuniganata    gaga't 

indabimigut !"     inandam.       "Taga,     mmawa,     ningagutcra/ 

'asa/u    kitci'a'sin,"    inantam.      Misa7    kaga't    cigwa7    minawa 

acipogitcinat ;  inabit  awaniban  Ini/u  ki'tcrarsinln. 


Anlc,  udamanisu'tagon  mi/u  kacawanimigut.      "  Waguna- 
25    nlwinan   Nanabucu  wani'tanondasi'k  iniga'a't  unitcanisac !" 


325 

"Please  be  careful,  Nanabushu,"  he  was  told;  "(else)  you 
will  do  your  children  a  hurt,"  he  was  told.  "Now,  precisely 
this  shall  you  do  when  you  have  come  at  your  home : 
you  shall  blow  a  tune  upon  this  flute  of  yours,  whereupon 
into  that  long  lodge  of  yours  will  come  some  moose. 
And  after  many  have  entered  in,  this  they  will  do :  they 
will  walk  round  about  inside  of  your  long  lodge.  And 
when  outside  comes  the  leader,  then  shall  you  break  wind ; 
(do  it  so)  that  you  make  it  go  into  your  long  lodge. 
Thereupon  shall  die  all  that  are  there  within.  Then  you 
will  have  some  food  to  eat.  After  you  have  eaten  them 
up,  then  again  shall  you  blow  upon  your  flute  for  them. 
Consequently  you  will  live  through  the  winter,  not  again 
will  you  be  hungry.  That  is  all  I  have  to  teach  you," 
he  was  told. 

Then  upon  his  way  started  Nanabushu,  truly  very  proud 
was  he.  By  and  by,  while  walking  along,  he  saw  an 
exeedingly  large  tree.  "Wonder  if  my  younger  brother 
could  be  telling  me  the  truth  in  what  he  said  to  me!"  he 
thought.  "I  say,  I  am  going  to  break  wind  at  it,"  thought 
Nanabushu.  Thereupon  truly  he  broke  wind  at  the  big 
tree,  accordingly  he  wrecked  it  completely.  "Why,  there 
really  is  no  doubt  but  that  my  younger  brother  is  telling 
me  the  truth  in  what  he  said  to  me,"  he  thought. 

While  walking  about  on  another  occasion,  he  saw  a 
large  rock  over  beyond  a  hill.  "Now,  wonder  if  really 
he  told  me  the  truth!"  he  thought.  "I  say,  once  more  I 
will  make  a  test  on  that  great  rock,"  he  thought.  There 
upon  truly  did  he  break  wind  at  it ;  when  he  looked,  there 
was  nothing  left  of  the  big  rock. 

Now,  the  sound  of  (Nanabushu)  doing  this  was  heard 
by  him  who  had  taken  pity  on  him.  "How  stupid  of 
Nanabushu  to  bring  disaster  upon  his  children  by  not 
paying  heed !" 


326 

Anlc,  pasigwl  Nanabucu,  anri'ca  abini'pan  Ini'u  ki'tcra/- 
sinin.  Wi'ka'ku  ingutci  apiwanltug  acipigiskisanit.  "Ml 
nangwana  kaga't  tabimit  nislmisa,"  krrnandam.  Acitag- 
wicink  antawat,  "Mindimoya,  ninglcawantagus,"  udinan  Ini/u 
5  umindimo'rmican.  Mlsax  cigwax  udinan:  "Wabang  uci'tota 
48i/u  walkwagan,"  udinan  Ini/u  wiwan. 


Misa7  gaga't  cigwax  kruji'towat  wa'kwagan.  Cigwa 
ka'klci'towat  lasa/u  mindimoya,  "Unabin,"  udinan  Ini/u 
umindimo'rmican.  Misa7  gaga't  cigwa  kru'nabiwat,  cigwasa7 

10  unondaguma'ton  lici/u  ubabigwan.  Cigwa  gaga't  mosos 
ugiwabamawa8  pldciba'i'tinit.  "Indackagu  kago  mlnawa 
kiticibabmi;tanzimitug,"  udigon  Ini/u  wlwan.  Misax  kaga't 
pmdigawa8  moso8  i'i'ma  wa'kwaganing.  Cigwasa7  saga'a*- 
mon  Ini/u  nagamnit  cigvvasa7  anawipogiti,  mlsax  kawm 

15  ugacki'tosm  48i/u  tcibogitit.  Gaga'tsa  uniski'a*n  umindi- 
mo-i'mican.  "Gagatsa  kawm  kini'tanondanzl  kago  anugl- 
•rni'kin  awiya  kago,"  udigon  lni/u  umindimo'rmican. 


Anicagu  kagagwanguskanik  48i/u  utclt.  Misa7  ajibwana- 
wi'tot  lisi/u  tcibogitit,  mldac  wandcinicki'a't  ini/u  wlwan; 

20  kaga/t  uglnicki*a*n ;  amc  pmic  ga'kina  saga'a'mo8  mini'k 
ka'pindiganit  Ii8i/u  moso8,  mldac  wandciniskra/t  !ni/u  wiwan. 
Mldac  igu  cigwa  ga'kina  pimisaga'a-minit,  ka'rcipa'kita/o'- 
watiskwatc  pimisaga'a-minit  a11  mindimoya.  Acipo'kwuga- 
dawat  Ini/u  mozonsan,  "Awananlwinan  dac  win  Ia8a/u ! 

25  Kuniga  anugri'natug  4i8i/u  ka'i'citcigat!" 


"Aye8,  gaga't!     Kawmina  nicing  indanugiminigosi  moski 
nawat  awaslyag  tcinisagwa?" 


327 

Now,  up  to  his  feet  rose  Nanabushu,  thither  he  went  to 
where  the  big  rock  had  been.  It  was  (only)  after  long 
persistent  (search  that  he  could  find)  where  here  and  there 
lay  a  shattered  (piece  of  rock).  "It  is  really  a  fact  that 
my  younger  brother  told  me  the  truth,"  thought  (Nanabushu). 
On  his  return  home,  "Old  woman,  I  have  been  blessed," 
he  said  to  his  old  woman.  Thereupon  he  then  said  to 
her:  "To-morrow  let  us  build  a  long  lodge!"  he  said  to 
his  wife. 

Thereupon  truly  did  they  build  the  long  lodge.  When 
he  and  the  old  woman  had  finished  it,  "Sit  down!"  he 
said  to  his  beloved  old  woman.  It  was  so  that  when  they 
were  seated,  he  then  blew  a  tune  upon  his  flute.  Then 
truly  did  he  see  some  moose  running  hitherward  into  the 
place.  "(I)  suspect  that  in  something  else  you  have  no 
doubt  been  disobedient,"  he  was  told  by  his  wife.  There 
upon  truly  into  the  lodge  came  the  moose.  When  out 
started  the  one  that  was  in  the  lead,  then  did  (Nanabushu) 
try  in  vain  to  break  wind,  but  he  was  not  able  to  do  it. 
Verily,  did  he  anger  his  old  woman:  "Truly  inattentive 
are  you  in  whatsoever  is  told  you  by  any  one,"  he  was 
told  by  his  old  woman. 

All  he  could  do  was  to  open  and  close  his  anus.  And 
since  he  was  unable  to  break  wind,  he  therefore  angered 
his  wife ;  truly  did  he  anger  her ;  (he  continued  without 
success),  even  when  out  went  all  the  moose  that  had 
entered,  and  that  was  why  he  had  angered  his  wife. 
Thereupon,  when  all  the  moose  were  on  their  way  out, 
the  old  woman  then  struck  the  one  that  was  last  coming 
out.  When  she  broke  the  leg  of  the  young  moose, 
"What  a  simpleton  he  is!  (I)  wonder  if  he  could  have 
been  told  what  to  do !" 

"Yes,  to  be  sure!  Was  I  not  given  (the  means  of)  twice 
killing  all  the  game-folk  filling  up  the  place?" 


328 

Mlsana     klwlsiniwat    agawa.       Mldac    ka'rcra*boda'a*nk 
;i/u    monsotcitms,    midac    Wwiti    wanta'i'plwat    klyupima- 
'kwisitot. 

Ugi'kanima8    a'pidci    pa'kadanit,    'a8a/u    anugicawanimat. 
5    "Ambasa7     ninga'i'canan,"     upmanimigon.       Mldac    kaga't 
tcigwa    klmadcat    'asa/u    micicigag.      Misa^    cigwa  udodisa8, 
"Anin,   Nanabucu,  ka'i-cisayan  ?"   udinan. 


Miguta  win  i'i'ma  udagamlmining  wanda'i'bmit  mozotci 
tms  kipimita'kwisinik,   'o^o^a  wanda'i'binit. 


10  "Awanamwinan  idac  win  kai'ndit  Nanabncu!"  uba'pi'a-n. 
Amc,  mlsa7  cigwa  udigon  :  "Anin  ka'i'ciwabisiyan,  Nana 
bucu?"  udinan. 

"Nislmisa7,  kanamigu  'i^witi  kl'pimadcayamban,  ayapi- 
'tawri'gu  patagwicinan,  ki'tcimi'tig  nimpipogitcinaban,  gaya 

15  kistci*a'sin.  Mlsa7  acictcigayan,  amba  idac  ningra/nwandis." 
Mlsax  udigon:  "Amc,  mlnawa  klga'a-cawanimin,"  udigon. 
"Mliu  pawaundci'i'cayan  4ci/u  wlcawaniminan."  Cigwasa7 
mlnawa  ubogitcitamagon.  "Kagudac  mlnawa  ijictcika'kan." 
Anlc  mlnawa  nlcing  umlnigon  ayabatci'tot.  Mlsax  anici- 

20  klwanit. 


Mldac  acikibotiyanigut  Ini/u  wiwan.     Misa7  kaga't.    Cigwa7 

gaga't  mlnawa  onondagwa'ton  4si/u  pabigwan.    Mlsax  cigwa 

mlnawa     ubitasabama8     monso8,    kaga't    cigwa    plndigawa8 

i'i'ma    wa'kwaganiwa.      Cigwasa7   pisagamo8,   nagamnit  aci- 

25   pogitcinat.       Misa7     ajanisat,     cayigwa     inabiwat    wandcita 


329 

Thus  the  poor  things  had  but  little  to  eat.  And  so 
when  she  had  turned  the  little  anal  gut  of  the  moose 
inside  out,  then  across  yonder  place  where  they  drew  water 
she  laid  it. 

He  knew  that  they  were  very  much  in  want  of  food, 
he  who  vainly  had  taken  pity  upon  (Nanabushu).  "There 
fore  I  will  go  to  where  he  is,"  was  the  thought  Nanabushu 
received  from  him.  Thereupon  truly  then  off  started  the 
Big  Skunk.  And  then  in  a  while  he  was  come  at  where 
they  were.  "What,  Nanabushu,  has  befallen  you?"  he 
said  to  him. 

Now,  yonder  at  the  lake  where  they  drew  water  was 
the  little  anal  gut  of  the  moose  lying  across  the  place, 
the  watering-place. 

"  How  foolish  of  Nanabushu  to  have  done  so !"  He 
laughed  at  him.  Well,  and  then  this  was  Nanabushu  told: 
"What  has  happened  to  you,  Nanabushu?"  (the  Skunk) 
said  to  him. 

"My  little  brother,  at  the  time  when  I  came  away  from 
(your  place),  when  about  halfway  I  was  come,  at  a  great 
tree  I  broke  wind,  likewise  at  a  great  rock.  That  was 
what  I  did,  and  I  feel  painfully  sorry  for  it."  Thereupon 
he  was  told:  "Well,  once  more  will  I  take  pity  upon  you," 
he  was  told.  "The  reason  of  my  coming  hither  is  that  I 
want  to  bless  you."  And  so  again  (Nanabushu)  had  wind 
broken  into  him  by  the  other.  "Now,  don't  you  do  it 
again."  Thus  was  he  again  given  what  he  should  use 
twice.  And  then  on  his  way  back  home  went  the  other. 

Thereupon  he  was  prevented  by  his  wife  from  breaking 
wind.  And  it  was  true.  Then  truly  again  he  played  a 
tune  upon  the  flute.  And  so  again  he  saw  the  moose 
coming,  truly  now  were  they  entering  the  long  lodge. 
When  they  were  coming  out,  then  at  the  one  in  the  lead 
he  broke  wind.  And  so,  after  he  had  slain  it,  then  they 


330 

mockinanit    antawat  monso8  mini'k  nasawat.      Anlc  misana 
klwawisiniwat. 

Caylgwa  udigon  Ini/u  wlwan:    "Ambasino,  ayangwamisin 
kigaTniga-a/k  ubinotcrarg  48i/u  kaickunaman." 
5        Anlc,  mlsa  gaga't  mino'a-yawat  4si/u  mosu'kawat.    "Mlma- 
wmi  iu  igu7  tatawabaniciyang,"  udinan  Ini/u  wlwan. 


"Mimawm    Ii8i/u,"    udigon.      "Gaga't  kigi'tcicawandagusi- 
min,"  udinan  Ini/u  unabaman   'a^^wi'kwa. 
Misa7,  mini'k  ka'kanimak. 

SERIES  IV.    No.  39. 
39.    NANABUSHU  AND  SOARING-EAGLE. 

10  Mlsa7  wipibonici  magisiwac.  Tcigwasa  wlmadci'ta  klngon- 
yan  wmotci'a't,  mldac  i8i/u  ajiwabamat  kitagwicininit  Ini/u 
Nanabucuwan.  "Nabwlna  mamawitcigayang  tcinotci'a'ngwa 
Igi/u  klngonyag?" 

"  1AU,  ml*i/<u  aciminwantaman  omagu  prrcigusin." 

15  Kaga't,  Nanabucu  pikabaci.  Misa  cigwa  madci'tawat  •, 
kingonyan  nlbiwa  unisawan.  Klngonya8  utatcitagonawa8. 
A'pitcisa7  nlbiwa  unisawa.  Cigwa  kackadinini  i'8iu  saga'i'- 
gan.  Mlsa7  acikusinit  Nanabucuwan ;  ka'kina  omadcina8 
kingonya8. 


20  Misa'pana  kawm  gago  ogamidcism  magisiwac.  "Anlc 
katiyang?"  Anawigu  pa'tamnuwa  iwa  anicinaba  imansa 
andanisit.  Cigwa  kipibonini,  mlsa  cigwa  pa'kadat.  Ningu- 


33' 

looked,  (and  saw  that)  the  place  where  they  lived  was 
completely  filled  with  all  the  moose  they  had  killed.  Thus 
the  poor  creatures  had  all  the  food  they  wanted  to  eat. 

Then  he  was  told  by  his  wife:  "Please  be  careful,  lest 
you  starve  the  children  (by  wasting  the  means)  you  have  left." 

Well,  it  was  so  that  they  got  along  comfortably  on  the 
moose  they  had  prepared  for  use.  "There  is  no  doubt 
but  that  we  shall  now  go  through  the  winter,"  he  said  to 
his  wife. 

"It  is  quite  likely,"  he  was  told.  "Truly,  in  high  degree 
have  we  been  blessed,"  to  her  husband  said  the  woman. 

That  is  as  much  as  I  know  of  (the  story). 

SERIES  IV.     No.  39. 
39.   NANABUSHU  AND  SOARING-EAGLE. 

And  now  Soaring-Eagle  was  planning  to  go  into  camp 
for  the  winter.  And  in  a  while  he  intended  to  set  about 
to  get  some  fish,  whereupon  he  then  saw  Nanabushu,  who 
now  arrived  (at  his  place).  "Would  it  not  be  well  for  us 
to  go  together  to  get  the  fish?"  (said  Nanabushu). 

"Very  well,  and  in  that  case  I  should  be  pleased  if  you 
would  move  your  belongings  over  to  this  place." 

Sure  enough,  hither  came  Nanabushu  to  camp.  So 
thereupon  they  set  to  work ;  many  fish  they  killed.  They 
hung  the  fish  upon  racks,  with  the  heads  down.  Ever 
so  many  they  killed.  In  time  frozen  became  the  lake. 
Thereupon  Nanabushu  moved  camp ;  all  the  fish  he  took 
away  with  him. 

And  so  not  a  single  thing  was  left  for  Soaring-Eagle 
to  eat.  "What  will  become  of  us?"  Yet,  for  all  that, 
many  were  the  people  at  the  place  where  he  was.  In 
time  the  winter  came,  whereupon  he  then  lacked  food. 


332 

tinigu,  unagucininig  a'pitci  wlwlsini  •,  kaya  Ini/u  wiwan  kaya 
isi/u  unitcanisa8  nlciwa2.  Kuckwawatisiwa8.  Awiya  pitwa- 
wacinon  ajipmdiganit.  "Magisiwac,  kiwi'kumigo." 


Udonagan  ka'irda'plnang,  ajimadcat.    Misiwa  anuplndiga 

5  Tni/u  wlgiwaman,  kawln  kuca  umi'ka^ln ;  ml  ga'kina  anugi- 

gapackank   Ini/u  wlgiwaman,  intawa  aciklwat.     Aciplndigat 

iyandat,    uganonigon   Ini/u  wiwan :    "Anln  dac  ici/u  kiwl'ku- 


migowm  r 


"Kawm  ninkutci  nimrkanzm  tciwl'kunding." 
10        Misa    alpi    ajiki'tcimawinit    Ini/u    wiwan  kaya  unldcanisac 
intawa    ajikawicimuwat ;    weyabaninig    mlsagu    kawln  kago 
omltcislnawa.       Cigwa     mlnawa     tibi'kadini,    midac    kaga/t 
wlwlsiniwat. 


Cigwa,  anitibi'katini,  pamagu  pata'pabinit  awiya.    "  Magi- 

15   siwac  kiwrkumigo."     Ka'u'ti'tinank  udonagan,  sagitcikwac- 

kuni,  agawagu  ugasa'kawabaman  animiba'tonit.    Ki'tci'a'ya- 

pisi'kat    umatcinlcawan.      Kunigimn,    utanikabi'kamini   Ini/u 

wlgiwaman ;    slpi    klckabi'kanig  anibintigasawan ;   mlgu  isi/u 

anitanisit.    Anipmdigawat,  muckinabiwa8  wa'kuntinit.    Kistci- 

20  pa'pi'a'.       Namagusan     wa'kuntinit,    kitcinibiwagu    acama. 

Kayabigu    ickusawan    Ini/u    tclba'kwanan.      Cigwa    kanona 

magisiwac  :  "Mlmawini  iu  kaga't  tcinondapaniciyan.     Intawa 

kigaki'kino'a'mago  ka/rcictcigayan.     Wabank  kimindimo'i*- 

mic    tablmina'kwa.       Klklci'tot     iblmina'kwan,     midac    isi/u 

25   ka'rciki'tcitwa/rgayan     iman     waplgamag    i*i/>u    sagai'gan. 


333 

Now,  one  evening  he  craved  exceedingly  for  some  food  to 
eat ;  so  too  (did)  his  wife,  and  his  children,  two  in  number. 
They  were  living  quietly  (there).  They  heard  the  foot 
steps  of  somebody  approaching,  who  then  came  inside. 
"Soaring-Eagle,  you  are  invited  to  a  feast." 

Taking  up  his  bowl,  he  then  departed.  In  every  wig 
wam  he  entered,  but  to  no  purpose,  for  he  did  not  find 
the  place  (of  the  feast) ;  accordingly,  when  into  all  the 
wigwams  he  had  entered  in  vain,  he  then  went  back  home. 
On  entering  into  the  place  where  he  dwelt,  he  was  addressed 
by  his  wife  saying :  "  Where  is  the  food  you  got  when 
invited  ?" 

"Nowhere  did  I  find  the  place  of  the  feast." 

Thereupon  then  bitterly  wept  his  wife  and  his  children. 
Accordingly  then  went  they  to  bed ;  in  the  morning  there 
was  nothing  for  them  to  eat.  In  time  it  was  night  again, 
whereupon  truly  did  they  yearn  for  food  to  eat. 

Now,  it  was  beginning  to  grow  dark,  when  of  a  sudden 
some  one  came  up  (and)  peeped  in.  "Soaring-Eagle,  you 
are  invited  to  a  feast."  Seizing  his  bowl,  out  of  doors  he 
leaped,  and  scarcely  did  he  catch  sight  of  him  who  went 
running  away.  As  fast  as  he  could  go  he  pursued  after 
him.  Lo,  the  other  sped  past  the  wigwams  •  into  the  falls 
of  a  river  the  other  ran,  whereupon  in  he  rushed.  As 
they  went  on  in,  (he  found)  the  place  filled  up  with  guests. 
He  was  made  much  fun  of.  (It  was  to  eat)  trout  that 
the  invitation  was  given,  and  with  a  great  deal  of  it 
(Soaring-Eagle)  was  fed.  There  yet  remained  some  more 
of  the  food  that  had  been  cooked.  Presently  Soaring- 
Eagle  was  spoken  to:  "It  is  indeed  quite  possible  that  you 
may  starve  before  the  winter  is  over.  Therefore  you  will 
be  taught  what  you  shall  do.  To-morrow  your  old  woman 
shall  make  some  twine.  After  she  has  finished  the  twine, 
then  you  shall  make  a  large  hole  in  the  ice  over  at  yonder 


334 

Mldac  i/u  usi'tank  kigatana'pina  laea/u  kinldcanis.  Kabota- 
'kwawa ;  mica'kisatdac  mli'u  ka/rciwl'kubinat,  tcra/nigu'k 
tcikitciwabinat.  Midac  iman  tciwabamat  asa/u  namagus. 
Klnigu  klgatibabamag  mlmawln  mini'k  katabisawat.  Ka/a*- 
5  'pi'tcibibonk  mrV'u  ka'ijickwa'taiyan.  Misaguna  iu  acica- 
wanimigoyan.  Mri'*11,  magisiwac,  iciglwan.  Magica  abiding 
klgawisinim,  mri''11  icikiwan.  Klwawic  namagus." 


Mldac  rru  ajipindigat  iu  andat,  kaga't  motcigisiwan  mi 
wlwan  kaya  unidcanisae ;  tci'a*nigu'k  wisiniwa8.  Misagu  iu 

10  cigwax  madci'tat  au  mindimoya  pimina'kwat  kabatibi'k ; 
wayabaninig  okici'ton  i'i'u  obimina'kwan.  Kigicap  ajimadcat 
magisiwac ;  wlwan  wldclwat  saga'i'ganing  icat.  Ka'tagwi- 
cink  wapigamank  iu  saga'i'gan  ajitwa-i'gat.  Ka'klcitod 
udwa'i'gan,  uda'kubinan  lni/u  unldcanisan,  usidaning  tana- 

15  'pinat.  Mldac  isi/u  acipoda'kwa'irwat.  Cigwa7  mica'klsawan, 
anigu'k  aciwfkubinat.  Ka'kidickubinat,  namagusan  pigi- 
tciskusawan.  Magisiwac  kaga't  minwandam.  "Kavvin  nin- 
dayanacrtanzl  kabaglcig."  Mlnawa  acipoda'kwawat  Ini 
unldcanisan.  Cigwax  mica'klsawan  tci'a-nigu'k  uwl'kubinan. 

20  Acikl'tciwabinat,  namagusan  owabaman.  Mldac  kaga't 
minwandank  au  maerisiwac. 


Cigwax  unagucinini.     "Ambasano,  midac  a'ta  iu  kanisank 

Ia8a/u    namagus."      Kaga't    nlbiwa.      "Mlmawln    isi/u    mini'k 

kadapisawat    kaya'pltcipibong.      1AU,    midac    a'ta    iu    pajik 

25   tcinisank."    Opoda'kwawan  iniyonitcanisan.    Cigwax  mica'kl- 


335 

narrows  of  the  lake.  Accordingly,  then  by  its  feet  shall 
you  tie  your  child  with  the  cord.  You  shall  put  it  down 
into  the  hole;  and  when  it  has  reached  the  bottom  then 
you  shall  draw  it  out,  with  all  your  power  shall  you  pull 
on  it.  And  then  there  shall  you  see  the  trout.  And  you 
yourself  shall  see  when  you  think  that  (the  fishes)  are 
enough.  At  the  end  of  the  winter  then  shall  you  cease. 
And  this  is  the  way  that  you  shall  be  blessed.  Therefore, 
Soaring-Eagle,  do  you  return  home.  Perhaps  for  once  you 
(and  your  family)  will  have  food  (enough)  to  eat,  therefore 
do  you  go  on  back  home.  Take  back  some  trout." 

And  so  when  he  entered  his  home,  truly  pleased  were 
his  wife  and  his  children ;  with  great  eagerness  did  they  eat. 
Thereupon  then  did  the  old  woman  set  to  work  weaving 
twine  all  night  long ;  when  it  was  morning,  she  finished 
the  twine.  In  the  morning  then  departed  Soaring-Eagle  -, 
along  with  his  wife,  he  went  on  his  way  to  the  lake. 
When  he  got  to  the  narrows  of  the  lake,  then  he  made 
a  hole  in  the  ice.  After  finishing  the  hole  in  the  ice,  he 
then  bound  one  of  his  children ;  by  its  feet  was  where  he 
bound  it.  Thereupon  they  put  it  down  into  the  hole. 
When  it  got  to  the  bottom,  then  with  all  his  might  he 
drew  it  out.  After  he  had  pulled  it  out,  then  the  trout 
came  out  of  the  ice.  Soaring-Eagle  was  really  happy. 
"I  will  not  stop  throughout  the  whole  day."  Then  another 
of  his  children  he  put  down  through  the  hole.  When  it 
got  to  the  bottom,  with  all  his  power  he  pulled  upon  it. 
When  he  gave  it  a  great  throw,  a  trout  he  saw.  And 
then  truly  pleased  was  Soaring-Eagle. 

In  a  while  the  evening  was  drawing  in.  "Behold,  just 
one  more  trout  I  will  kill."  To  be  sure,  (there  were)  many 
(trout).  "It  may  be  that  they  are  now  enough  to  last 
through  the  winter.  Therefore  only  one  more  will  I  kill." 
Down  into  the  hole  he  put  one  of  his  children.  As  soon 


336 

sawan,  uwfkubidon.  Acibwawipitod  ayangwatcic,  tcra/ni- 
gu'k  udanawikubidon.  Kaka'pl  acipa'kibidot,  misa'pana 
unldcanisan.  Tcianigu'k  mawi7  magisiwac,  kayayu  wlwan. 
Indawa,  ka'i'ckwamawit,  uglgo'i'miwa8  uglwawinawa  ka'kina 
5  andawat.  Ka'i'ciwmawat  isi/u  klgonyas,  madca  awigagwat- 
wat  •  mldac  icat  iniwa  nigigwan.  Cigwax  uganonan  :  "Mlsa 
iu  kmisangit  lasa/u  ninldcanisinan."  Aciganonint  magisiwac : 
"Ambasa',  nawatc  mbiwa  ugawaci'ton  kimindimowimic 
bimina'kwan.  Kl'klci'tot,  mldac  i8i/u  ka'i-cimadcayan,  kl- 

10  ga'i'ca  ima11  klpa'kibinat  a11  kinidcanis.  Magisiwac,  klgi- 
'kandanina  wandcima'kamigoyan  au  kinidcanis?  Usam 
nlbiwa  kiglnisag  Igi/u  gingonyag.  Klnicki'a'  'a8a/u  micina- 
magwa.  Mra>u  ka'u'da'pinat  kimtcanisan.  Klga  gackra"-. 
Nandawabamat,  ml  nasab  ka/rcictcigayan,  tcita'kubisoyan 

15   ima  kisidank." 


20 


Magisiwac  mi  cigwa  madcat.  Twa'i'bi.  Ka'i'ckwatwa- 
•i'bit  ajipa'kublt.  Maca'klsat  owabandan  ml'kana  pima- 
munik.  Ajimadcat,  mada'irdot  mi'kana.  Kumagu  a'pl 
tagwucink,  unontawa  awiya  piba'pinit.  Owabama8  i'kwawa8; 


ajiganonac : 


"Anin  anano'kiyag  wabigamagr 


"Nindawinici  pa'pino'tawanan  wisanta.; 


337 

as  it  got  to  the  bottom,  he  drew  it  back.  As  he  was 
losing  his  pull  on  it  the  longer  (he  held  on),  then  with 
all  his  power  he  tried  drawing  it  back.  At  last  he  broke 
the  line,  and  then  gone  was  his  child.1  Very  bitterly  wept 
Soaring-Eagle,  and  also  his  wife.  Accordingly,  when  he 
had  ceased  crying,  they  carried  all  their  fish  back  to  where 
they  lived.  After  they  had  dressed  the  fish,  he  departed 
thence  to  make  inquiry ;  and  so  he  went  to  where  the 
Otter  was.  In  time  he  spoke  to  him,  saying:  "Therefore 
now  have  we  slain  our  child."  Then  was  Soaring-Eagle 
addressed  by  him  saying:  "Behold,  let  your  old  woman 
make  some  more  cord.  When  she  has  finished  it,  then 
shall  you  depart,  you  shall  go  to  the  place  where  you 
broke  the  line  (that  held)  your  child.  Soaring-Eagle,  do 
you  know  why  your  child  was  taken  from  you?  Too 
many  of  the  fishes  have  you  slain.  You  have  angered 
the  Great  Sturgeon.  He  is  the  one  that  has  seized  your 
child.  You  can  obtain  (your  child).  When  you  seek  for 
it,  you  should  follow  the  same  method  that  (you  did)  before, 
by  having  yourself  bound  by  your  feet." 

Soaring-Eagle  then  departed  thence.  He  made  a  hole 
in  the  ice.  After  he  had  finished  the  hole  in  the  ice,  he 
then  went  down  into  the  water.  When  he  got  to  the 
bottom,  he  saw  a  path  that  led  off  (in  a  certain  direction). 
Then  he  started  forth,  following  along  the  path.  When 
at  a  certain  distance  he  arrived,  he  heard  some  one 
coming  along  laughing.  He  beheld  some  women;  to  them 
he  spoke,  saying :  "  With  what  are  you  busied  at  the 
narrows?" 

"We  intend  to  meddle  with  the  deadened  pine."2 


1  Because    he   had    not   obeyed    what   had   been  told  him  when  he  was  blessed. 
It   is  a  common  belief  of  the  Ojibwa  that  he  will  come  to  some  kind  of  grief  who 
kills  more  game  than  needed.     Therefore  wanton   destruction  of  game  is  a  taboo. 

2  Where  a  net  is. 


22— FUEL.    AMER.    ET1IN.    SOC.    VOL.    VII. 


Asabln  miwanini11  acawat.  Midac  isi/u  pita'a/mwat  minawa 
anind.  Owabama8.  "Anm  anano'klyag  ?" 

"  Nindawipa'pinotawanan  pabamitagotag  u'kanab."1 

Anijimadcat,  pacu'  owabandan  odana.     Pajig  owabaman ; 
5   oganonan :    "Nldcanis  pa*irndcrrcayan." 

"Mru-ma  ayat  aea/u  kinldcanis.  Kawln  kidamlnigusl.  Ml 
au  nindogimaminan  ayawat  Iniyu  kinldcanisan.  Intawa 
a'kama11  tcisaga'a'nk ;  unagwucig  mi  a'p!  tcisaga'a'nk." 

Cigwa     unagucinini.       Madwaglgito    pacig    inini :     "A'e, 

10  mlsa     minawa     mimisiwag    cigwa    tciamwangwa."       Cigwa 

pimisaga'a'mon ;  kaga't  minditowan  micinamagvvan.    Wasax 

cigwa    anitagwicinon    plndigasa    andanit ;   uglwabaman  unl- 

dcanisan.      Aci'u'di'tinat,  tci'a'nigu'k  udo'to'kablgiba'to  isi/u 

plmina'kwan.      Ki^ci'a'nigu'k  uwl'kubiton  la€a/u  mindimoya. 

15   Pa'kic    anigu'k    madca    Magisiwac.      Cigwa    udababandan 

udwa'i'gan.      Abanabit    pltawaniwan    wlnawadamigut    ini/u 

miclnamagwan.      Midac  kaega't  anigu'k  ajimadcat,  acigitci- 

pisut    rrman  udwa'i'baning.      Ka'kitcibisut,   inabit,   udwa'r- 

ganing     pisagi'kwasawan     miclnamagwan,     acigi'tcipisunit. 

20   "  'A'a/u,  mindimoya,  kiwaga'kwat  mam  on !      Niwana/s!" 


Mindimoya11  udoda'pinan  owaga'kwat ;  uniwanawan  Ini/u 
miclnamagwan.     A'ta,  kaga't  minditowan  ! 

"Mindimoya,  kiwawinata."    Kawasa  ugackiasiwawan  ana- 
wi  udodabanawan.     Anicinabac  unadamaguwas,  mi  pitclnag 


339 

It  was  to  a  net  that  they  were  going.  Accordingly 
then  came  some  others  singing.  He  saw  them.  "What 
are  you  busied  with?" 

"We  are  going  to  meddle  with  the  cord  that  hangs 
across." l 

As  he  started  on,  not  far  away  he  saw  a  town ;  a  certain 
one  he  saw;  to  him  he  spoke,  saying:  "It  is  on  account 
of  my  child  that  I  have  come." 

"In  this  place  is  your  child.  It  will  not  be  given  to 
you.  It  is  our  chief  that  has  your  child.  Therefore  you 
would  better  wait  till  he  comes  out ;  in  the  evening  is 
when  he  comes  forth." 

In  time  it  was  evening.  There  came  the  voice  of  a 
man  saying:  "Well,  so  then  we  shall  have  some  more 
mayflies  to  eat."  Then  (he  beheld  the  chief)  come  forth ; 
truly  big  was  the  Great  Sturgeon.  When  a  long  way  off 
(he  saw  that  the  chief)  was  come,  he  flew  into  where  (the 
chief)  lived;  he  saw  his  child.  Then  grabbing  it  up,  with 
all  his  might  he  ran,  jerking  upon  the  cord.  As  hard  as 
she  could  the  old  woman  pulled  upon  it.  At  the  same 
time  with  speed  went  Soaring-Eagle.  In  time  he  came  in 
sight  of  the  hole.  On  looking  back,  (he  saw)  the  Great 
Sturgeon  coming  with  mouth  open  to  devour  him  ;  where 
upon  truly  at  full  speed  he  went,  out  through  the  hole 
he  flew.  After  he  had  flown  through,  he  looked,  (and  saw) 
the  Great  Sturgeon  with  his  head  out  of  the  hole  in  the 
ice,  then  out  upon  the  ice  he  leaped.  "Now,  old  woman, 
get  your  axe  !  Pound  him  to  death !" 

The  old  woman  picked  up  her  axe;  she  clubbed  the 
Great  Sturgeon.  Ah,  truly  big  he  was ! 

"Old  woman,  let  us  carry  him  home!"  Not  even  were 
they  able  to  drag  him.  By  the  people  were  they  helped 
to  drag  him,  and  that  was  when  they  were  able  to  handle 

i  With  the  cord  at  the  edges  of  the  net. 


340 

kackra/wat.      Misa    iu    cigwa'    ki'tagwicimawat.      "Kaga't, 
kiga-a-camanan  wa8a/u  nigig  kacawaniminang." 

Kaga't   minwantamog  acamitwa  lgi/u  nigigwag.      "Magi 
siwac,    mri/>u  kawin  wfka  klgapa'kadasi.      Keyabi  wawi'i'- 
5  goyan     kistci    unicicin    ka'i-cictcigayan.       'A8a/u    Nanabucu 
kini'tam   kigapa'kada'a*.     Awikimodim   lni/u  uglgon'rman." 

Kaga't  ajimadcat  Magisiwac.      Ajikacki'tot  ugrrcigimoti- 
man  mi/u  Nanabucuwan.    Kaga't,  ugikackiton  ka'kina  kl'ki- 
motimat.     Misa  win  ni'tam  Nanabucu  kipa'ka'tat.     Kaga't 
10  minwandam  Magisiwac  pa'kadanit  Ini/u  Nanabucuwan. 

Misa  pinawitclt  agatag. 


SERIES  V.     Nos.  40-42. 
40.   NANABUSHU  is  MIRACULOUSLY  FED  BEAR-GREASE. l 

Nanabucu  aTnda  wlwan  kaya  mlnawa  kaya  lisi/u  unl- 
tcanisa8  nlciwa8.  Misa7  mri''u  wi'pibonicit  Nanabucu,  kawin 
kago  udayasm  kamldcit.  Mlsax  mi  cigwa  piboninig  madci- 
1 5  'tat  antawantcigat.  E,  kawasa  kago  uni'tosm !  Moncag 
ugigri'gon  Ini/u  awaslyan,  kawin  ogiwanisasln.  Ninguting 
uganonigon  wlwan:  "Anm  ka'i'cipimatisiyank?  Wllka  kago 
tcini'tosiwan." 


20  "Nintawa  mocag  ningakiyota," 3  ilkitu  Nanabucu.  Waya- 
bank  ajimadcat.  Ningutingidac,  pimusat,  anicinaban  uto- 
lkawi'a*n  mada'a'nat ;  saga'i'ganing  tawan.  Amnabit  uton- 

1  For  other  versions  see  Nos.  36  (p.  311)  and  52  (p.  421). 


341 

him.  Thereupon  they  then  got  him  home.  "In  truth,  we 
will  feed  the  Otter  that  has  blessed  us." 

Truly  pleased  were  the  Otters  to  be  fed.  "Soaring-Eagle, 
therefore  never  shall  you  be  in  want  of  food.  Something 
very  much  better  is  yet  to  be  told  you  to  do.  It  is  now 
your  turn  to  make  Nanabushu  hungry.  Go  rob  him  of 
his  fishes." 

Truly  thence  departed  Soaring-Eagle.  As  much  as  he 
could  did  he  rob  Nanabushu.  In  truth,  he  was  able  to 
steal  them  all  from  him.  Accordingly  it  was  Nanabushu's 
turn  to  be  hungry.  Truly  pleased  was  Soaring-Eagle  to 
have  Nanabushu  in  need  of  food. 

And  so  now  the  buttocks  of  the  ruffed  grouse  hang  aloft. 


SERIES  V.    Nos.  40-42. 
40.  NANABUSHU  is  MIRACULOUSLY  FED  BEAR-GREASE. l 

Nanabushu  was  living  with  his  wife  and  two  children. 
It  was  there  that  Nanabushu  intended  passing  the  winter, 
but  he  had  nothing  to  eat.  It  was  now  becoming  winter 
when  he  undertook  to  seek  for  game.  Alas !  not  a  thing 
could  he  kill.  Often  was  he  given  the  slip  by  the  game- 
kind,  none  did  he  kill.  Once  he  was  addressed  by  his 
wife  saying:  "How  are  we  going  to  live?  Never  a  thing 
do  you  kill." 

"Therefore  always  will  I  go  a- visiting," 3  said  Nanabushu. 
On  the  morrow  then  he  departed.  Now  once,  while  walking 
along,  he  chanced  upon  the  footprints  of  some  people,  in 
whose  path  he  now  followed;  by  a  lake  they  lived.  As 


2  Visiting  among  friends,  generally  with  the  sense  that  the  visitor  goes  to  "sponge" 
off  his  guests. 


342 

ta-rbanining,  mldac  iman  wabandank  ma'kutiska'k  ; l  H'-wisa 
twa-rbaganit  rrman  wanta'i'blnit.  Anlci'kuplt,  wlgiwam 
klpata'kitanig.  Ajipmdigat  ininiwan  namadapiwan,  kaya 
i'kwawan,  kaya  48i/u  unltcanisini  n!ciwas.  Inabit  Nanabucu 
5  ma'kowminon  papa'kwanit.2  Kaga't  umisawlnawan  ini/u 
ma'kuwlninon. 


Midac  48i/u  kigitowan  ininiwan :  "  Wagunacina  kagiga- 
•a-nk3  au  blwita?" 

Mldac  iu  ajikigitunit  Ini/u  i'kwawan  :   "Amcina  antotaman 
10  wawisiniyangiban,  mri/<u  katotamamban  tciglga/i'wayan." 

Ajiklgitut  Ia8a/u  inini :  "Taga,  pidon  48i/u  utcictcini'k."  4 
Kaga't  acimmint  Ia8a/u  Inini.  Kaijimlnint,  "  'A'a/u,  unagan 
kaslyapickinan." 


Kaga't  'a'itlkwa  ajikasiyapi'kinank,  wawmga  ka'pmi'tot 
1 5  iu  unagan ;  mlnawa  'i8i/u  utcictcini'k  ajikaslyapi'kinang. 
Ka'klci'tot,  magwagu  namadapinit  lni/u  ininiwan,  panimagu 
pasingutcisawan  nawatinaminit  lisi/u  abanj  "San,  san,  san, 
san !"  inwawan,  Midac  iman  pimita'kupitciganing  kuniginm 
uniciciwani  owacanani,  pa'kic  nondagusiwan,  "Sank,  sank!" 
20  inwanit.  Midac  'isix  utcictcini'k  amma°wanit  lisi/u  unicici 
wani  kagicim  pacipa°wanit  'isi/u  uniciciwani.  Ningutingiku, 
acipacipa'°'wanit  4i8i/u  uniciciwani,  panagu  ma'kupimita  un- 
tcitciwanini.  Ajiklgitut  Ia8a/u  atcitamu  :  "Mmotc  agonan  iu 
wanagan." 


1  The  anal  gut  was  used  to  start  the  hole  in  the  ice  by  one  end  of  it  being  held 
down  on  the  ice,  and  some  one  sucking  from  the  other. 

2  The  true  idea  conveyed  here  is  that  the  strangers  had  so  much  food  that  they 
could  even  use  it  for  making  a  dwelling. 


343 

he  looked  about  the  place  from  which  they  drew  water,  he 
saw  there  the  anal  gut l  of  a  bear ;  now,  that  was  what  they 
used  in  making  a  hole  from  which  to  obtain  water.  On 
going  up  from  the  shore,  (he  saw)  a  wigwam  standing. 
On  entering,  (he  saw)  a  man  who  was  seated,  also  a  woman, 
and  their  children,  numbering  two.  While  looking  about, 
Nanabushu  saw  (chunks  of)  bear-tallow,  which  they  used 
for  a  lodge-covering.2  Truly  did  he  covet  the  bear-tallow. 

And  then  up  spoke  the  man:  "What  shall  we  give  the 
guest  (to  eat)  ?" 3 

Whereat  up  spoke  the  woman:  "Why,  the  same  as  you 
generally  do  when  we  want  to  eat,  is  what  you  should  do 
when  providing  your  gift." 

Then  up  spoke  the  man:  "Well,  fetch  hither  the  awl."4 
Truly  was  it  then  given  to  the  man.  After  it  had  been 
given  to  him,  "Now,  then,  a  vessel  do  you  wipe." 

Truly,  when  the  woman  wiped  it,  thoroughly  clean  did 
she  make  the  vessel ;  next  the  awl  was  what  she  wiped. 
After  she  was  done  with  her  work,  and  while  the  man 
was  yet  seated,  of  a  sudden  up  he  sprang,  seizing  hold 
of  the  lodge-pole.  "San,  san,  san,  san!"  (such)  was  the  sound 
of  his  voice.  Thereupon  yonder  upon  the  cross-pole  (he 
was  surprised  to  see  him)  exposing  his  testes,  while  at  the 
same  time  he  could  be  heard  making  the  sound,  "Sank, 
sank!"  (such)  was  the  sound  he  made.  And  it  was  with 
the  awl  that  he  aimed  at  his  testes  and  almost  piercing 
his  testes  with  it.  And  then  of  a  sudden,  when  he  pierced 
his  testes,  immediately  some  bear-grease  came  flowing  out. 
Then  up  spoke  the  Squirrel:  "Hold  the  vessel  close  up 
against  it!" 

3  Kagiga-a-nk?     "What  shall  we  give  (to  eat)?"     This  expression  occurs  in  such 
connections    as    here,    where    food    is    the    thing  given;  and  so  it  has  come  to  be  a 
synonyme  for  "to  feed,"  but  its  real  sense  is  in  the  giving  of  a  present. 

4  Utcictcini'k,    uawl;"   that  is,  the  awl  made  from  the  ulna,  usually  of  a  moose, 
deer,  or  caribou. 


344 

Kaga't  a'a'r'kwa  ajiada'tot  iman  ka/rcipangiganik  'i€i/u 
pimita ;  mistci  wlba  mockinablnik.  Ka/i  jimockinabmi'k  i 
wunagan,  pinlsantawawan.  aMlsaguna'i*u  a/rclyan  kayanln 
wawlsiniyanin." 

5  Anlc,  Nanabucu  a'pidci  pa'kada.  "Ambagic  wawlp  klga- 
gowan,"  inandam  Nanabucu.  Mlnawa  wlyas  kaga't  wani- 
cicininik,  ma'kowiyas, -- abi'tagu  pimitawaninig ;  kayadac  iu 
pimita  Nanabucu  pagidinamawa  lifii/u  kamldcit.  Kaga't 
minowlsini,  kaya  nlbiwa  wisini.  Ka'i'ckwawlsinit,  migu'i-ma11 
10  wanimo'k,  ka'u'ndcina'kibinat  uglcota'u'na81  nawatcigu  unln- 
gwantagina.  "Mlsa  cigwa  wl'klwayan."  Nanabucu  kanona: 
"Mlgiri'11  iciklwawitau  kimtcanisag  4si/u  kitickwantcigan."  3 


Kaga't  minwantam.      Midac  iu  acisaga*ank. 

Kanisaga'a'minit,    inabit    laca    winini,    uglwabamas    lici/u 

15  klcota/u'na8.     Anlc,  wabosawayani  Nanabucu  ugljo'ta-u'na8. 

Midac    iu    ajikanonat    a'a*    inini :    "Taga,  madciltawilk  lici/u 

ugicota-irnac    lasa/u    Nanabuca,  wasagu  undciwabinamawi'k 

lisi/u  uglcota'u'na8 !" 

Kaga't,    ajisagitcisawat    lgi/u    kwlwisansag    no'pinanawat 

20  mi/u.      Cigwa  udatimawin.     " Klwam'kanag  kiglco'ta/u'nag." 

Kaga't,    wasagu    nawatc   anu*u*ndci'a'ipaginawat,  uganoni- 

guwan     Nanabucowan :     ulcta,    kipa'kadamawasa    kmawa ! 

Wabank  kosiwa  tabi'i'ca.      Nlwawlsinimin  nmawint." 

1  UgIcotJi'U'nac,  "mittens  5"  the  usual  word  for  mittens  is  mintcikawanag.  The 
word  used  here  is  for  protectors  against  cold,  and  it  may  refer  to  mittens  or  ear- 
protectors',  it  also  refers  to  the  string  of  rabbit-fur  that  is  put  through  the  hole  of 
the  ear  in  order,  so  it  is  said,  to  keep  the  ear  warm.  The  sense  of  this  word 
would  often  seem  to  imply  that  it  meant  ear-warmers  or  ear-protectors ;  but  it  is 
given  as  mittens,  because  the  Ojibwa  themselves  regard  that  as  the  sense  of  the  word. 


345 

Truly,  the  woman  then  placed  (the  vessel)  there,  where 

'the  grease  might  drip  into  it ;  and  very  soon  it  was  full. 

When  the  vessel  was  full,  then  down  came  climbing  (the 

Squirrel).      "This  is  just  a  way  I  have  whenever  I  too  wish 

to  eat." 

Naturally,  Nanabushu  was  very  hungry.  "Would  that 
I  might  presently  be  given  something  to  eat!"  thought 
Nanabushu.  Furthermore,  there  was  some  meat  that  was 
truly  nice,  —  bear-meat,  —  and  half  of  it  was  in  grease;  and 
some  grease,  too,  did  Nanabushu  have  placed  before  him 
to  eat.  Truly  he  ate  good  food,  and  much  did  he  eat. 
After  he  had  finished  eating,  he  thereupon,  without  being 
seen,  pulled  out  his  mittens,1  and  he  hid  them  under  the 
balsam  boughs  (beneath  the  mat).  "It  is  now  time  for 
me  to  go  back  home."  Nanabushu  was  addressed  (with 
words)  saying:  "Therefore  do  you  take  back  home  to  your 
children  the  food  which  you  did  not  eat  up." ! 

Truly  he  was  pleased.    Thereupon  out  of  doors  he  went. 

When  Nanabushu  had  gone  out,  (and)  while  the  man3 
was  looking  about>  he  saw  the  mittens.  Now,  of  rabbit- 
fur  were  the  mittens  of  Nanabushu.  Thereupon  then  (to 
his  children)  spoke  the  man,  saying:  "Come,  take  the 
mittens  to  Nanabushu,  and  from  afar  do  you  throw  him 
the  mittens!" 

Truly,  then  out  of  doors  sprang  the  boys,  who  ran  in 
pursuit  of  him.  Soon  they  overtook  him.  "You  have 
forgotten  your  mittens."  Truly,  when  from  a  rather  long 
distance  they  tried  to  fling  them,  they  were  addressed  by 
Nanabushu  saying:  "Oh,  but  you  people  must  be  hungry! 
To-morrow  let  your  father  come  over.  We  ourselves  always 
have  plenty  to  eat." 

2  Kitickwantcigan,    "the   food   which   you   did  not  eat  up;"  literally,  "your  left 
over  food." 

3  That  is,  the  Squirrel. 


346 

Anlc  kiwawag  Igi/u  kwlwisansag. 

"Anlc  anri-nag  'a8a/u  Nanabucu?" 

"Ka,  'kosiwa  taplca,'  i'kito  Nanabucu.  'A'pidci  nan- 
gwana  klpa'kadam  nangwana.'" 

5  Nanabucu  aniijimadcat  klwat ;  tcibwatagwicin  andawat, 
upltamawa  unldcanisa8  kaya  Ini/u  wlwan  utickwantcigan. 
A'pidci  minuwlsiniwa8,  mlsagu  pitclnag  wlsininit. 

Kaga't  minwantam  awi'kwa.      Mlsagu  cigwa  ajimadci'tat 
Nanabucu    utcictcini^k    uci'tot,   kaya  win  wipacipa'wat  Ini/u 
10  uniciciwan.     Ka'kici'tod,   una'i'nan  liei/u  utcictcini'k. 

Mfsa  wayabanininig  kabaglcik,  ayabit  pra't  Ini/u  piwitan. 
Anlc  udina  unldcanisa8:  "  Acawabiyu'k."  Ningutingigu 
pmdigasawa8  48i/u  unldcanisa8:  "Cigwa  piwita!" 

Taya,  kaga't  pi'irndcipindigawan  Ini/u  ininiwan. 
15        Nanabucu  kawln  kanaga  kago  otayasm.      Misa  ajiklgitut 
Nanabucu:  "Wagunacina  ka*a-camak  Ia8a/u  piwita?  Mlnotc, 
kislnan  iwanagan."    Ka'i'ckwagismaminit,  "Mlnotc  aiciyang 
kaya  nmawint  wawlsiniyangiban." 


lI8i/u    wri'cictcigat    Nanabucu.      Ni'tam    udoda'pinan  rru 

20  utcictcini^k.      'A8,    Nanabucu  ajinawatinank   utabanc,  kawln 

nangim     kacki'irsl     anawra*lkwantawat.       Wrka    pitclnag 

ajikacki-u't    i'i*man  pimida'kupitciganing  icat.      Mlsa7  iicinl- 

cominaginat  'i8i/u  uniciciwa8,  kawaninang  utcictcini'k,  "Sank! 

sank!     sank!"    inwat.       Kakicimigu'ku    wlcaganamat    lifii/u 

25   uniciciwa8,    ningutingigu    acipacipa'wat   4ci/Ll  uniciciwa8,   pa- 

nagu    kapi'ti'kukamigicink    rrman  nawackuta.      Anlc  mlgu 

isi/u  a'pitaganantisut. 


347 

So  back  home  went  the  boys. 

"What  did  Nanabushu  say  to  you?" 

"Oh,  'Let  your  father  come  over,'  said  Nanabushu. 
'So  you  really  must  be  very  hungry."1 

Nanabushu  was  then  on  his  homeward  way ;  before  he 
was  come  at  where  they  lived,  he  was  fetching  to  his 
children  and  his  wife  the  food  he  had  left  uneaten.  Very 
well  did  they  eat,  and  that  was  a  time  when  they  ate. 

Truly  pleased  was  the  woman.  So  thereupon  began 
Nanabushu  on  the  work  of  making  an  awl,  for  he  also 
desired  to  pierce  his  testes.  After  he  had  finished  making 
it,  he  put  away  the  awl. 

And  so  on  the  morrow  all  day  long  he  remained  at 
home,  he  was  waiting  for  the  visitor.  So  he  said  to  his 
children:  "Do  you  keep  watch."  Then  by  and  by  in 
rushed  his  children:  "Here  is  a  stranger!" 

Ah,  truly  from  without  came  the  man  entering  in. 

Nanabushu  had  not  a  single  thing.  Thereupon  said 
Nanabushu :  "  What  shall  we  feed  the  guest  ?  However, 
do  you  wipe  the  vessel."  When  she  had  wiped  it,  "Why, 
this  is  the  way  we  generally  do  whenever  we  want  some 
thing  to  eat." 

This  was  what  Nanabushu  intended  doing.  He  first 
took  up  the  awl.  But  when  Nanabushu  seized  hold  of 
the  lodge-pole,  he  was  not  soon  successful  in  his  efforts 
at  climbing  up ;  and  after  a  long  while  he  was  able  to 
get  upon  the  cross-pole  (over  the  fire).  And  when  taking 
hold  of  both  his  testes  in  his  hand,  after  that  he  had 
seized  a  firm  grip  upon  his  awl,  then  "Sank,  sank,  sank!" 
was  the  sound  he  uttered.  Being  almost  ready  to  strike, 
he  was  aiming  at  his  testes,  when  of  a  sudden  he  pierced 
his  testes,  and  forthwith  down  he  dropped  with  a  thud 
into  the  centre  of  the  fire.  Now,  the  fall  was  so  severe 
as  to  kill  him. 


348 

Anicagu  nantaganimusig  Ia8a/u  i'kwa  agwawabinat, 
kawmigu  ugacki'a/sln  anawiagwacimat.  4A8a''i<lkwa  ajika- 
nonat  upiwitaman  :  "Nyan,  wltcri'cin  tcra-gwawabinag !" 

Ajipasiguntcisat     'asa/u    inini    agwawabinawat.      A'tawa, 
5  kawlyablsut    Nanabucu !      Kaga't    tcagisu    wilka    mi'kawi. 
Mlsana  papa'kawisit  Nanabucu. 

'E8,  aba'pic  klnanamadapit  'a8a/u  inini.  Kaga'pi,  kigito- 
wan  :  "Taga  kislblginint  iyonagan  !" 

Kaga't    acikisiblginit    ;a'i*'kwa    iu    unagan,    minawa   48i/u 
10  utcictcini'k. 

"Mri'u.  Plton  iyotcictcini'k."  Acimmint  Ia8a/u  inini. 
Panimagu,  namadapinit,  nawatinaminit  apanj,  "San,  san  san !" 
Mldac  4U,  "Sank,  sank,  sank!"  wacanat  uniciciwani !  Kagl- 
cimigu'ku  micaganamanit  4U  uniciciwani,  ningutingigu 
15  acipacipa'wanit,  panagu  pimita.  u  'Ala/u,  mlnotc  ininamu'k 
48i/u  unagan!" 


Kaga't    mockinani    unagan.      Kamockinani'k,    pinisanta- 
wawan. 

Ajikigitot  Nanabucu:  atAca/u,  migu  4U  kanglnka-i'wayank." 

20        "Kawasa7,    kmawagu    intawa    wlsiniyu'k,"  a'pan  saga'a-- 
minit,  anijikiwanit. 

Nanabucu  kagat  minwantam  wlsinint  tmltcanisa8. 

1  That  is,   "tried  to  fling." 

'2  This  sentence  has  to  be  recast  with  a  free  rendering,  in  order  to  give  the  sense. 
Its    real    meaning    may    b-e    variously  rendered:   "Well,  we  did  not  see  what  he  was 


349 

Then,  working  with  all  her  energy,  the  woman  flung1  him 
out  of  the  fire;  but  she  was  not  able,  with  all  her  efforts, 
to  pull  him  out  of  the  fire.  The  woman  then  spoke  to 
her  visitor,  saying:  "Oh,  do  help  me  take  him  out!" 

Then  up  sprang  the  man  to  take  him  out  (of  the  fire). 
Oh,  but  Nanabushu  got  a  hard  fall !  Truly  was  he  thor 
oughly  burned.  A  long  while  was  he  reviving.  And  then 
came  the  time  when  Nanabushu  was  conscious. 

Well,  for  a  long  time  was  the  man  seated  there.2  Finally 
he  said:  "Come,  wipe  the  vessel!" 

Truly  then  did  the  woman  wipe  the  vessel  clean,  also 
the  awl. 

"That  is  enough.  Bring  hither  his  awl."  Then  was  it 
given  to  the  man.  Of  a  sudden,  while  yet  seated,  he  seized 
the  lodge-pole.  "San,  san,  san !"  and  then,  "Sank,  sank, 
sank !"  while  he  held  his  testes  exposed.  Almost  did  he 
strike  his  testes  when  he  aimed  at  them ;  and  when  by 
and  by  he  pierced  them,  then  forthwith  was  there  grease. 
"Come  on,  don't  mind  (anything  else),  but  hold  up  the 
vessel !" 

Truly  full  was  the  vessel.  And  when  it  was  full,  then 
down"  from  the  pole  he  came. 

Then  said  Nanabushu:  "Now,  then,  with  that  will  we 
make  entertainment." 

"It  is  no  use,  only  you  yourselves  had  better  eat." 
Then  straightway  out  went  (the  guest),  on  his  way  back 
home  he  went. 

Nanabushu  truly  was  pleased  (to  see)  that  his  children 
had  food  to  eat. 


invited    for,    but  yet  the  man  simply  kept  on  sitting  there,"  or   «...  without  cheer 
he  continued  sitting  there." 


350 
41.  NANABUSHU  AND  THE  MALLARD^ 

Wayabaninig  ajimadcat  klyusat,  kawasa  kago  uni'tosln. 
Moncag  anukru'sa,  mlsontcita  kawln  kago  uni'tosl.  Mlsa/ 
a'pidci  pa'kadat.  Cigwa  wayabaninig  ajimadcat  Nanabucu, 
mldac  lisi/u  pabaantakiyotat.  Ninguting  uto'kawra-n  ani- 
cinaba2,  omata'a-nat.  Kumagu  a'pl  tagwicink,  owabandan 
andanit.  Anijiplndigat  ininiwan  namadapiwan,  kaya  win 
i'kwawan  kaya  'i£i/u  unidcanisini.  Ajikanonint :  "  l  Ala/u, 
namadapin !"  ina  Nanabucu. 


Kigitowan    !ni/u    ininiwan:    "Wagunacina   kagiga/a'nk  a11 
10  piwita?      Taga,     mmotc     nibi     anagoton,"     inimawan    Ini/u 
i'kwawan. 

Kaga't,  agi'kwan  aciwanagonat  a'iakwa.      Magwagu  na- 

madapinit  !ni/u  ininiwan,  undcipasigu'o'wan,  nondagusiwan  : 

"Kwank,    kwank,    kwank,"    inwawan.      Mldac    ima11    mida- 

15   'kupitciganing  aciponlnint,   nondagusint :    "Kwank,   kwank, " 

inwanit.     A'tawa,  kunio-inm  acimlsinint  Ima11  a'kikimk, 

O  ' 

towan  :    " 'Ala/u  mmotc  ana'a'n!" 


Kaga't  Ca8a/u  udana-a'n.  Magwagu  ana'a'nk,  kuniginln, 
manomin  a'pidci  mockina  i'i'man  a^ki'kunk;  kaya  pankuta. 
20  "  'Au,  mri/pU  ici-a'gwacim."  Mldac  48i/u  acinlsiponlnint. 
"  Mlsaguna  iu  kaya  mn  a'i'ciyan  wawisiniyanin."  Mlnan- 
gwana  Ininciban  watisat.  Kawunabinit,  "Ambasa7,  unaga- 
nink  a'ton,"  Inimawan  mi/u  i'kwawan,  "a'pidcigu  mocki- 
na'ton." 

1  For  another  version  see  No.  37  (p.  317). 


4i.  NANABUSHU  AND  THE  MALLARD.1 

When  the  morrow  was  come,  then  off  he  went  on  a 
hunt  for  game,  but  not  a  thing  did  he  kill.  Continually 
without  result  did  he  hunt-,  and,  in  spite  of  all  he  could 
do,  nothing  did  he  kill.  Thereupon  very  hungry  did  he 
become.  Then  on  the  morrow  away  went  Nanabushu,  it 
was  to  wander  from  place  to  place  visiting  (old  friends). 
Once  he  came  upon  the  footprints  of  some  people,  in 
whose  trail  he  then  followed.  When  some  distance  farther 
on  he  was  come,  he  saw  where  they  lived.  On  entering 
in,  (he  saw)  a  man  that  was  seated  there,  likewise  a  woman 
and  their  children.  He  was  addressed:  "Welcome!  be 
seated!"  was  told  Nanabushu. 

Then  up  spoke  the  man :  "  What  have  we  to  offer  the 
guest  (to  eat)?  Well,  anyhow,  hang  up  (a  kettle  of)  water!" 
he  said  to  the  woman. 

Truly,  then  a  kettle  did  the  woman  hang  up.  And 
while  the  man  was  seated,  up  he  flew,  and  was  heard  to 
say,  "Kwank,  kwank,  kwank!"  (such)  was  what  he  uttered. 
And  then  yonder  upon  the  cross-pole  (above  the  fire)  he 
alighted,  being  heard  to  say,  "Kwank,  kwank !"  (such)  was 
the  sound  he  uttered.  Oh,  how  strange  that  when  he 
muted  into  the  kettle,  he  was  saying,  "Come  on,  pay  no 
heed,  but  keep  it  stirring !" 

Truly  she  stirred  it.  And  while  she  was  stirring  it,  lo, 
very  full  of  rice  was  the  kettle  there ;  and  it  was  cooked 
dry.  "All  right!  now  take  it  off  the  fire."  And  then 
down  he  flew,  alighting.  "Now,  this  is  only  a  way  I  have 
whenever  I  want  to  eat."  It  happened  to  be  a  Mallard 
whom  he  had  come  to  visit.  After  the  Mallard  was  seated, 
"Come,  into  a  vessel  do  you  put  it!"  he  said  to  the  woman, 
"and  very  full  do  you  fill  it." 


352 

Kaga't  i'kwa  omockina'ton   'isi/u  unagan. 

"  'Aa/u,   Nanabucu,  wlsinin!" 

Nanabucu  ajimatantcigat.     A'pidci  tawlsinit,  ajanici'tank. 

"Mlna/  mini'k  wasimyan?" 
5        "Amn   dac  ka/rcikagantackineyan  ?" 

"Nanabucu,  m!gu*ru  iciklwawic  waca/u  tclba'kwan.   Magica 
kinltcanisag  pitamau." 

Nanabucu  ajiklgitut:  "Mlcigwa  wi^Iwayan."    Mlgiri'man, 
wanimo'k,  wantcicagunat  (ici/u  uglco'ta'irna8.     Ajisaga'a'nk, 
10  pacux  ani'a'yat. 


i'i7-11    alkitut    laca/u    inini  :    "Ambasino,    kagu  iciwi- 
'tawa'kag  lisi/u  uglco'ta'u'na  'aca/u  Nanabucu.  " 

Mlsa    kaga't    kawln  iciwltawasl.      Cigwa   Nanabucu  kwl- 

nawlpi'u-    tciblciwltawint.      Aciplpagit  :    "Nlwunitcigagima  !" 

15   Kawln  anubisiskitawasi.  Ackam  anigu'k  ajiplpagit.   Gaga'pl, 

"Manu,    iciwitawi'k  ;    wasa    undcra'pagitawi'k    48i/u    uglco- 

'ta-u-na." 

Cigwa  owabama  kwlwisansa8.  "Icta,  pacux  picayu'k  ! 
Mlnangwana  iu  acipa'kadaya'k.  Kawln  nlmpa'kudasl. 

20  Wabank  kosiwa  tablca  mamwatcigu  nawa'kwanig."  Mldac 
48i/u  amcimadcat  Nanabucu.  Ka'tagwicink  antat,  kaga't 
motcigisiwa8  umdcanisa8  wlsininit,  kaya  Ini/u  wlwan  ;  a'pidci 
tawlsiniwag.  Wayabaninig  mlsa  cigwa  ajiprirt  Ini/u  plwi- 
taman,  pra't  nawa'kwanig.  Cigwa  tagwicinon.  Kawuna- 

25  binit,  "Wagunacina  ka'a'camank  Ca8a/u  plwita?  mlnotc  a'ki'k 
unagoc." 

Kaga't,   Nanabucu  wlwan  utonagoton  'isi/u  nipi. 
"Anigu'k  pagitinisan,   wawip  taxwanso  a11  a'kik."     Taya, 


353 

Truly,   the  woman  filled  up  the  bowl. 

"All  right,  Nanabushu,  do  you  eat!" 

Nanabushu  then  began  eating.  When  his  desire  for  food 
was  quite  appeased,  then  he  ceased  (eating). 

"Is  that  all  you  are  going  to  eat?" 

"And  how  am  I  to  force  (myself)  to  eat  (more)?" 

"Nanabushu,  therefore  then  do  you  take  back  to  them 
at  home  the  rest  of  the  cooked  food.  Perhaps  to  your 
children  do  you  take  it  home." 

Nanabushu  then  spoke,  saying:  "It  is  now  time  for  me 
to  go  back  home."  And  so,  when  no  one  was  looking, 
in  under  the  mat  he  pushed  his  mittens.  When  he  went 
outside,  then  near  by  did  he  tarry. 

And  this  was  what  the  man  said :  "  Please  do  not  carry 
to  Nanabushu  his  mittens." 

And  so,  truly,  he  did  not  have  them  fetched  to  him. 
Already  was  Nanabushu  becoming  tired  of  waiting  to  have 
them  brought  to  him.  Then  with  a  loud  voice  he  called  : 

o 

"I  have  forgotten  my  mittens!"  He  was  not  harkened  to. 
Then  with  a  louder  voice  he  called.  At  last,  "Well,  go 
take  them  to  him;  from  afar  do  you  throw  him  his  mittens." 

Presently  he  saw  the  boys.  "  W7hy,  come  you  up  close ! 
And  so  it  is  a  fact  that  you  are  without  food.  I  am  not 
hungry.  To-morrow  let  your  father  come  over  exactly  at 
noon."  Thereupon  away  then  went  Nanabushu.  When 
he  was  come  at  where  he  lived,  truly  pleased  were  his 
children  to  have  food  to  eat,  so  the  same  with  his  wife; 
thoroughly  were  they  satisfied  with  food.  On  the  morrow 
he  then  waited  for  his  guest,  he  waited  for  him  at  noon. 
Soon  he  was  come.  When  he  was  seated,  "What  have 
we  to  feed  the  guest?  Anyway,  hang  up  the  kettle." 

To  be  sure,  the  wife  of  Nanabushu  hung  up  the  (kettle 
of)  water. 

"With    much    wood    do  you  build  up  the  fire,  soon  let 

23—  PUBL.    AMER.    ETHN.    SOC.    VOL.    VII. 


354 

magwagu  namadapit  Nanabucu  undcipasingutcisa  nonda- 
gusit :  "Kwank,  kwank,  kwank!"  inwat  Nanabucu.  Kistci- 
wl'ka  ajikackru't  iman  mita'kupitciganing  Nanabucu. 
Kawanagosit  iman  mi'ta'kupitciganing,  anigu'k  kintcitanamu 
5  anuwl'kwatcimlslt  •,  ubwanawi'ton.  Ningutingigu  umisa'kut- 
can  ajipangisinini't  i'i'ma0  a'ki'kunk,  ugandnan  wlwan : 
"Mlnotc!  ana-a-n." 


Ajiklgitut  awi'kwa :  "Acamadci,  madci  anim !  kigagwa- 
nisagi'a-  lasa/u  kita'ki'kunan !  Intawa  ajipimipasigwlt  awi- 
10  lkwa,  pimipina'°'wat  !ni/u  a'ki'kwan ;  pana  agwatcing  icat 
awislgwapinank  lisi/u  nibi.  Kaijikisiyabi'kinat  Ini/u  uta'ki- 
kowa,  piplndiga  a'i-'kwa.  Nanabucu  tayoc  agos  pimita'ku- 
pitciganing ;  kawln  kacki'o'sl  anawlnlsantawat.  Ajikanonat 
wlwan:  "Kawasa  ningacki'O'si  anawinlsantawayan." 


15  Kaga't  a'pidci  nickatisi  'asa/u  i'kwa,  nanantawlpagama- 
ganat ;  'a'i^kwa  cigwa  umi'kan  mi'tig.  Nanabucowan  ajia- 
gosinit,  klgito  i'kwa :  "Nacka  kuca,  ningamwana'wa  klml- 
dcinat  lni/u  a'ki'kwan." 

Cigwa    wipa'kita/u-nt  Nanabucu,  migu  iwiti  wantcipisut ; 
20  pi*a-nigwackwanit,   mlsana  kinogabamint  Nanabucu. 

A'tawa !   aba'pic  kinanamadapi  plwita.      A'pidci  wiwisini, 
midac  ajikigitut :    "Taga,   mlnotc  anagoc  au  kita'ki'kowa." 

Kaga't,     a'i^'kwa    udagonan    Iniyoda'ki'towan ;    cigwasa 
onsowan. 
25        Kunigimn,     undcipasigwa-o'wan,     kayagu     nontagusinit : 


355 

the  kettle  boil."  Aha !  now,  while  Nanabushu  was  yet 
seated,  up  he  sprang,  being  heard  to  say:  "Kwank,  kwank, 
kwank!"  (such)  was  the  sound  Nanabushu  uttered.  It  was 
a  great  while  before  Nanabushu  was  able  to  mount  the 
cross-pole  (over  the  fire).  After  he  was  perched  up  there 
on  the  cross-pole,  then  with  much  effort  did  he  grunt  in 
vainly  trying  to  ease  himself;  he  could  not  do  it.  But 
when  by  and  by  a  lump  of  solid  dung  dropped  into  the 
kettle,  he  addressed  his  wife,  saying:  "Never  mind!  but 
keep  it  stirring." 

Then  said  the  woman:  "Mercy  sake,  vile  dog!  you  will 
simply  ruin  our  kettle."  Accordingly,  to  her  feet  the 
woman  quickly  rose ;  immediately  down  she  took  the  kettle ; 
straightway  out  of  doors  she  went  on  her  way  to  empty 
out  the  water.  After  she  had  cleansed  their  kettle,  then 
back  inside  came  the  woman.  Nanabushu  was  still  perched 
upon  the  cross-pole  (over  the  fire).  He  was  not  able  by 
his  own  efforts  to  climb  down.  Then  he  spoke  to  his 
wife,  saying:  "Not  at  all  am  I  able,  in  spite  of  my  own 
efforts,  to  climb  down." 

Truly  very  angry  was  the  woman,  she  was  in  search 
of  something  to  use  for  a  club  •,  the  woman  presently  found 
a  stick.  While  Nanabushu  was  perched  up  there,  the 
woman  said:  "Look  and  see!  for  I  am  going  to  club  him 
to  death  who  eased  himself  in  the  kettle." 

When  Nanabushu  was  about  to  be  struck,  then  from 
yonder  place  he  fell ;  he  leaped  down  when  she  made  as 
if  to  hit  him. 

Alas!  without  cheer  there  sat  the  guest.  Very  anxious 
was  he  to  eat.  Whereupon  he  said:  "Now,  forget  every 
thing  and  hang  up  your  kettle." 

Truly,  the  woman  hung  up  their  kettle ;  presently  it  began 
boiling. 

At  that  moment  up  flew  (the  guest)  from  his  place,  and 


356 

"Kwank,  kwank,  kwank, "  inwanit:.  Mlsa'  aciponlnint 
iiman  pimita'kupitciganing  pa'kic  nondagusinit :  "Kwank, 
kwank,"  inwanit.  Mlslwan  ajikanonigowat :  "Mlnotc! 
ana/a'mu'k." 


5        Mlsa    kaga't    ana/a'mowat,    a/tawa    kuniginm    manomin 
a'pidci  mockinatanig,  kaya  pangwaninig ! 
a  'Au,  mri'-*  iciagwasitok." 
Kaga/t  udagwasiton  a'i-'kwa. 

Mlsa^tawa  saga'a'mon  Ini/u  uplwitamiwan.     Mlsa7  cigwa 
10  wlsiniwat  Nanabucu. 


42.  NANABUSHU  AND  THE  WOODPECKER^ 

Wayabaninig  mlnawa  anukiyusa,  mlsa'irndcita  kawln 
kago  uni'tosln.  Mlnawagu  animadca ;  mrirntcita  kawln 
kago  ani'tosln. 

Kaga'pi  ajikigitut  wlwan:  "Kaga't  klgo'patis.     Awacima 
15   intawa  kistcikro'tayan ;  miya'ta  ka'i'ciwlsiniyangiban,  mlya'ta 
tciwabaniciyank." 


Kigicap  ajimadcat  Nanabucu.  Kumagu  a'pi  tagwicink, 
saga'i'gan  owabandan.  A'I'nabit,  awlya  owabaman  paba- 
mataga'kunit.  Ani'i'cat,  owabaman  Ininiwan.  "Taga,  kani- 
20  wldclwin  wrkiwayan."  Cigwa  owabandan  wlgiwam ;  ani- 
pindigawan  kaya  win  ka'U'nabit  owabaman  i'kwawan  taci- 
mackimuta'kanit.  Nanagagu  cigwa  kanonimawan  :  "Taganax, 
agoc  4aea/u  a'ki'k." 

1  For  other   versions   see  Nos.   35  (p.  305)  and  53  (p.  423). 


357 

was  heard  saying:  "Kwank,  kwank,  kwank,"  (such)  was 
the  sound  he  uttered.  Thereupon  he  alighted  yonder  on 
the  cross-pole  (over  the  fire)  at  the  same  time  that  he  was 
heard  saying:  "Kwank,  kwank,"  (such)  was  the  sound  he 
uttered.  By  him  while  muting  were  they  addressed  :  "  Never 
you  mind !  only  do  you  keep  it  stirring." 

Thereupon,  truly,  as  they  kept  it  stirring,  how  wondrously 
full  the  rice  filled  (the  kettle),  and  how  dry  it  cooked  ! 

"Now  it  is  time  to  take  it  off  (the  fire)." 

Truly  off  the  fire  the  woman  took  it. 

And  so  with  disappointment  forth  from  the  place  went 
their  guest.  Whereupon  then  did  Nanabushu  (and  his 
family)  eat. 

42.  NANABUSHU  AND  THE  WOODPECKER. l 

On  the  morrow  he  went  on  another  fruitless  hunt  for 
game,  and  it  was  just  his  luck  not  to  kill  a  thing.  An 
other  time  he  set  out ;  but,  as  ill  luck  would  have  it,  he 
did  not  kill  a  thing. 

At  last  then  up  spoke  the  woman:  "Really,  you  are  of 
no  use.  It  would  therefore  be  much  better  for  you  to  go 
on  a  visit  among  (your  friends);  for  only  by  such  means 
shall  we  obtain  food  to  eat,  only  in  that  way  shall  we 
live  through  the  winter." 

In  the  morning  then  departed  Nanabushu.  When  some 
distance  away  he  was  come,  a  lake  he  saw.  While  looking 
around,  he  saw  somebody  walking  about  on  the  ice.  When 
he  started  hitherward,  he  saw  a  man.  "Pray,  let  me  go 
with  you  when  you  depart  for  home !"  Presently  he  saw 
a  wigwam ;  when  in  the  other  went,  so  then  (did)  he. 
When  he  was  seated,  he  saw  a  woman  busily  making  a 
bag.  After  a  while  she  was  then  spoken  to:  "Please 
hang  up  the  kettle." 


358 

Kaga/t  a'i-'kwa  a'ki'kwan  otonagonan.  Ka'klcrtat,  pani- 
magu  namadapinit  undcipasigwa'5'wan,  abaclng  apagisowan 
nondagusiwan  :  "Kwu,  kwu,  kwu,  kwu  !"  inwawan.  Mman- 
gwana  maman  watisat.  Cigrwa.  ka'tao-wicininit  iwiti  sowaga- 

o  o  •  o  o  • 

5  nink,  ma^tigwa/rga'wan.  Nagatciku  mantaminas  pislgisawa2 
mri'ma11  a'ki'kunk,  mldac  iu  acimockinanit  Ini/u  uda'ki'ko- 
wan.  Pa'i'cinisikwaskwaninit,  misa/  nasap  anicinaba. 


Anlc,  mlgu  mmawa  iu  kiwawanabinit  ini/u  i'kwawan 
mackimuta'kanit,  kigitunit  Ini/u :  "Wagunacina  kaya'pabo- 

10  wayank?  mlnacigwuna'i'u?" 

Kunigimn,  uga^a'kasiyabi'kinan  i*i'u  mo'kuman.  Kuni- 
gimn,  acimatagwacabinat  mi/u  wiwini,  kuniguca  pi'kwana- 
ning  acimaticwat,  kumagu  mini'k  uba'kwacwan.  Ka'pa- 
lkwacwat,  mldac  H<u  usi'kon  acisinagwunamawat  Iman 

15  klpalkwacwat.  Mld.ac  iman  uda'ki'kowang  acipoda^kwa'a/- 
mowat  i  wiyas.  Aci*o'nsunit  oda'kikowan.  Cigvva  kaklci- 
tanig,  aci'a-gwablga-a'nk;  Nanabucu  pagitinamawa  tcivvlsinit 
kaya  -i*  mandaminaG. 

A'tawa,    mldac    kaga't    Nanabucu    minuwisinit!      A'piclci 
20  ka'tawlsinit,   mri/<u  aci'a'nacl'tank.     Mlsa/  mlnawa  ajikanat 
ugico^a'u'na8.       "Mri-/u    madcayan     kiwayan."      Nanabucu 
ina :    "Migiri<u  tciglwawitau." 

Mlnawa,  kumagu  a'p!  anitagwicink,  pipagi  Nanabucu : 
"Kiwanitcigagima!"  Kawm  anutabwa'tawasl.  Ackam  ani- 
25  gu'k  pipagi,  kaga'pl,  "Manu,  icivvltawi'k  Nanabucu  uglco- 
'tauna8." 

Kaga't  kwlwisansag  uticlwinawa.  Anlc,  wasagu  utaca- 
'pagitawawa  ajikanonat :  "Nictcimictca,  pacugu  plcayu'k, 


359 

Truly,  the  woman  arranged  (the  kettle)  so  as  to  hang. 
When  she  had  finished,  then  of  a  sudden  he  that  was 
seated  flew  up,  a-lighting  yonder  on  the  lodge-pole,  (and) 
could  be  heard  saying:  "Kwu,  kwu,  kwu,  kwu!"  such  was 
his  cry.  It  happened  to  be  the  Red- Head  that  he  was 
visiting.  Now,  when  (the  Red-Head)  was  come  at  the 
meeting  of  the  lodge-poles,  he  then  began  pecking.  And 
after  a  while  some  corn  came  pouring  into  the  kettle  there, 
whereupon  full  of  it  became  their  kettle.  Down  he  came 
hopping ;  and  when  (he  was  come),  then  back  again  (was 
he  in)  human  (form). 

Well,  and  so  another  time  was  the  woman  seated,  making 
her  sack,  when  she  said:  "What  shall  we  put  (into  the 
corn)  for  seasoning,  or  shall  it  be  just  so?" 

Lo,  he  now  wiped  the  blade  of  his  knife.  Behold,  when 
he  uncovered  his  wife,  plump  on  her  very  back  he  then 
began  slicing  her,  rather  large  pieces  he  sliced  off.  When 
he  had  done  with  carving  her,  he  then  rubbed  his  spittle 
over  (the  place)  where  he  had  carved  her.  And  then  into 
their  kettle  they  put  the  meat  to  boil.  Then  their  kettle 
began  boiling.  Now,  after  the  food  was  done  cooking, 
then  out  she  dipped  it ;  and  in  front  of  Nanabushu,  that 
he  might  eat,  she  placed  (the  meat)  and  the  corn. 

Oh,  but  Nanabushu  truly  had  a  pleasant  time  eating! 
After  he  was  quite  satisfied  with  food,  he  accordingly  ceased 
eating.  And  then  again  he  hid  his  mittens.  "Now  I  should 
start  back  home."  Nanabushu  was  told:  "Therefore  do 
you  take  them  home  (some  food)." 

Again,  after  some  distance  he  was  come,  out  called 
Nanabushu:  "I  have  forgotten  something!"  But  in  vain 
was  he  not  listened  to.  Louder  still  he  shouted,  till  finally, 
"Well,  then  do  you  take  to  Nanabushu  his  mittens." 

To  be  sure,  the  boys  took  them  to  him.  Now,  from 
afar  were  they  throwing  them  to  him,  when  he  said  to 


3<5° 

Klpa'katamawasa  klnawa.  Wabank  kosiwa  tablca,  nawa- 
'kwag  ugapinatin  kamitciyag."  Misa'  ajiklwat  Nanabucu 
ka'tagwicink  antawat,  mlsana  minawa  wlsiniwat.  Mlwlnrru 
krkanonat  wlwan :  "Nackana!  mackimuta'kan."  Ajikanoni- 
5  gut  Nanabucu  wlwan:  "Intaska  minawa  iu  awlya  kago 
klcinawawatan.  Atatagwacaku  kimanici  ickwa'kamik  klto- 
tanziwan  !" 


Nanabucu  ajiklgitut :    "Manu!   mackimuta'kan." 

"Wagunacina  ka'a'batci'toyan  i'i*u  tcimackimuta'kayan?" 
10        Anic,  wlgublc  udayan  a'i^kwa,   mlsana  iu  wanabiginank. 

Anlc  pabi'u't  Nanabucu.  Cigwa  nawa'kwanig  tagwicinon 
Ini/u  ininiwan.  Pa'plndiganit,  "  Wagunacina  ka-i'cangayang?" 
Nanabucu  piwabi^kuc  uglkaciboton.  Ka'plndiganit,  Nana 
bucu  pasiguntcisa.  uKwu,  kwu,  kwu,  kwu!"  inwat.  Acicisitot 
15  ublwabi'kuni  ima11  ucingwanank,  cigwa  a'kwantawa.  Cigwa 
iwiti  kacki'o-  tisawaganing.  Cigwa  uba'kra/n  utaballjlwa8. 
A'tawa!  wantagu  kaga't  wasa  ina'kwitcit  pangicink,  atcuan!" 
inwawacin  Nanabucu. 


A'tawa !   unawatinan  abiwita.      Manu,   intawa  uwrkubita- 
20  wan     iu    plwabi'k.       PangI    win    gu    kanaga    miskwri'wan, 
kaslyabanawat  miskwiwinit. 

Nanabucu    cigwa    anipaga'katisi    ajiklgitut:    "Manu    gu, 
mackimuta'kan  !"  udinan  Tni/u  wlwan. 

Anlc,  kaga't  madci'ta  'a8a/u  i'kwa  mackimuta'kat.     Mri'u 
25   cigwa  kl'U'ta'pinank  iu  mo'kuman,  cigwa  umanibitawan  'isi/u 


them:  "My  little  brothers,  up  close  do  you  come.  You 
must  be  hungry.  To-morrow  let  your  father  come  over, 
at  noon  let  him  come  to  get  some  food  for  you  to  eat." 
And  so  it  is  said  that  when  Nanabushu  was  come  at 
where  they  lived,  then  the  poor  things  ate  again.  There 
upon  he  spoke  to  his  wife,  saying :  "  Now,  come  and  make 
a  bag!"  Then  was  Nanabushu  answered  by  his  wife  saying: 
"No  doubt  but  that  you  have  again  seen  somebody  doing 
something.  Oh,  how  you  make  me  ashamed  in  your 
trying  always  to  do  everything !" 

Nanabushu  then  spoke  up:  "Never  you  mind!  just  you 
make  the  bag." 

"Pray,  what  shall   I   use  to  make  the  bag?" 

Now,  some  bast  did  the  woman  have,  and  so  with  that 
she  began  weaving  (a  bag). 

In  the  mean  while  waited  Nanabushu.  When  it  was  noon, 
then  came  the  man.  When  he  entered  within,  "Pray, 
what  shall  we  offer  (him)  to  eat?"  Nanabushu  sharpened 
an  old  piece  of  metal.  After  the  other  had  come  in, 
Nanabushu  then  sprang  up.  "Kwu,  kwu,  kwu,  kwu  !"  was 
the  sound  he  uttered.  When  he  placed  the  metal  into 
his  nose,  then  up  he  climbed.  Presently  he  was  able  to 
reach  the  meeting  -of  the  lodge-poles.  Then  he  pecked 
at  their  lodge-poles.  Alas !  right  straight  in  for  a  long 
way  it  truly  entered.  When  he  dropped,  "ten!"  was  the 
sound  Nanabushu  made. 

Poor  thing!  him  the  visitor  grabbed.  However,  he  then 
pulled  out  the  metal.  And  (he  saw  that  Nanabushu)  had 
nevertheless  bled  a  little,  (whereupon)  he  then  washed  him 
where  he  was  bloody. 

Nanabushu  was  now  becoming  conscious  when  he  said  : 
"Never  you  mind,  but  make  the  sack!"  he  said  to  his  wife. 

Now,  truly  the  woman  started  upon  the  work  of  making 
the  sack.  Then,  when  he  took  up  the  knife,  he  began 


362 

ubablnsikawaganicini.  Acimaticwat  pi'kwananing,  panagu 
nondagusinit  a'pitci  uwlsagicwan.  "Pisan!  ml  guca'ku  iu 
antotaman  wa'klga-rwayan." 

Medac  acikanonigut  plwitan  :   "Pa'ka!   kanabatc  klganisa 

5   kimindimd'rmic.      Intawa  plton  iu  mo'kuman."     Acipa'kwa- 

cumint  Ini/u  wlvvan,  acipota'kwa'a'minit  iman  uda'ki^kowang. 

Mlnawa,  pasigwa'u'nit  iman  tiso'a'ganing,  midac  iman  mati- 

'kwa'i'ganit.      Nagatcigu    mandamina8  pisigibisowa8,   uta'ki- 

'kowang    i'i'ma    acislbigisunit.      Kamockinanit    ini/u    uda'ki- 

10  'kowan,   mlsa'i'11   Nanabucu  iciwisinit.      "Mri^11  ninglwa." 

Mlsa'i'   pinawitcit  (agatag).1 

SERIES  VI.     No.  43. 
43.  NANABUSHU  HUNTS  BUFFALO  WITH  HIS  YOUNGER  BROTHER. 

Anipapimusa  kiwan  Nanabucu ;  magwagu  kiwa  papimusat 
oglwabandan  slbawasaya'kwanig.  Awagwagi,  kiwan  papa- 
'kira'nk,  awagwagi  kiwa  48i/u  a'ki  kagwanisagiunicicinini. 

15  "Misa  o  mackuta,"  ilkitu  kiwan.  Ucadinani  k!wan  ima 
kwaya'k  ajat.  Wadi'tank  klnwan  ima  ucadinanik  nanlbawit 
ima.  Mlgu  klwan  iu  ajinagwatinik  ucadinanik  mini'k  taya- 
babandank.  Amc,  mlsa  papimusat,  anisasagatciwat,  anici- 
naban  klwan  kipimusawan  ;  ayagwa'kiba'togwanltug  agwa- 

20  skawat.      Sagatciwat    klvvan,   a'pidci  klwan  umagwaskawan. 


1  The  last  word  is  supplied  by   the  editor.     See  pp.  340,  341, 


removing  her  old  jacket.  When  he  began  carving  her  at 
the  back,  straightway  she  began  to  be  heard  (crying  aloud). 
Very  painfully  did  he  hurt  her  with  the  knife.  "Hush! 
for  this  is  what  I  always  do  whenever  I  wish  to  entertain." 

Then  was  he  addressed  by  the  guest  saying:  "Stop! 
perhaps  you  will  kill  your  old  woman.  Therefore  fetch 
hither  the  knife."  When  (the  visitor)  sliced  off  a  piece 
from  the  wife  of  (Nanabushu),  he  put  it  into  their  kettle 
to  boil.  Next,  flying  up  to  the  meeting  of  lodge-poles, 
(the  visitor)  then  began  to  peck.  After  a  while  some 
corn  came  pouring  out,  into  their  kettle  it  poured.  After 
their  kettle  was  full,  then  did  Nanabushu  eat.  "Now  I 
am  going  home." 

Whereupon  the  buttocks  of  the  ruffed  grouse  (hang  aloft).1 


SERIES  VI.    No.  43. 
43.  NANABUSHU  HUNTS  BUFFALO  WITH  HIS  YOUNGER  BROTHER. 

On  his  way,  they  say,  was  Nanabushu  walking  •,  and  it 
is  said  that  while  walking  about  he  beheld  a  vista  opening 
out  through  the  trees  beyond.  Really,  so  the  story  goes, 
when  he  broke  through  into  the  open,  why,  they  say 
(what  he  saw)  was  a  country  marvellously  beautiful.  "This 
is  a  plain,"  he  said,  so  goes  the  story.  A  ridge  of  high 
land,  they  say,  lay  exactly  in  the  direction  he  was  bound. 
W^hen  he  got  there,  it  is  said  that  yonder  on  the  ridge 
he  stood  for  a  long  while.  Indeed,  according  to  the  story, 
there  could  be  seen  ridge  (after  ridge)  as  far  as  he  could 
see.  Well,  it  was  while  walking  along,  as  he  went  up  the 
hills  and  down  again,  (that  he  saw)  a  man,  so  it  is  said, 
walking  hitherward ;  he  then  must  have  run  round  to  head 
him  off,  when  he  intercepted  him.  When  he  came  out 


364 

Anlc  weyabamigut  nogigabawiwan.    Anlc,  mrrma  krirdisat. 
Caylgwa  ajikanonat :    "Paba/aTnatisiyan,   niclm." 


"Ac,    Nanabucu,    crcrma    pacu'    mina'kwa    aya,    mrrma 
acayan,   ninda-u'piji'ki'ka." 

5  "Ta'tiya,  niclm,  misa  kaya  nin  !  Mro'ma  pacu7  mina'kwa 
aya,  mri'ina  awudacipiji^akayan.  Anlc,  niclm,  klgatani- 
wltclwin.  Panima  iwiti  nagatc  klgapa^kawinin."  Ajikano- 
nigut :  "  1AU,  ambasa,  Nanabucu,  madcata!" 


Misa  cigwa  madcawat.   Kagwanisa  mistcani  kiwan  wiskwa1 
10  cayagwansonit;  mlgu  kinwan  ima  pasanagitiyanit  ti'tibisanik. 
Sagatciwawat  kiwan  ima  ucadinanik  ajijagasklnit.      "Nana 
bucu,  cayigwa  ima  nisa'ki  piji'kiwag  pimawanitiwag." 


Ajrajakiwawat,    "Ningwis,   pajiksana  uda'U'bimwan  Ini/u 
pijilkiwan,  kidanawatclmin  sana."  l 

15  Panimagu,  kinwan,  wantcisagitcikwaskwaninit  ininiwan  ima 
wlskwang,  a'pana  iwiti  ani'ijipasatinanig  ani'a-'pa'tonit. 
Panimagu,  klwan,  iwiti  acadinanig  wantcisagatciwakwaskwa- 
ninit  piji'kiwan,  ucimunit. 

"Ambasa,   Nanabucu,   madcata!" 


upon  the  summit,  they  say  right  there  he  met  him. 
Naturally,  when  (Nanabushu)  was  observed,  then  the  other 
halted,  standing  in  his  place.  Well,  it  was  there  that 
(Nanabushu)  got  to  where  he  was.  In  a  while  he  then 
spoke  to  him:  "(So)  you  are  journeying  about,  my  little 
brother." 

"Yes,  Nanabushu,  over  here,  near  by,  is  a  clump  of  trees 
(on  the  plains),  and  it  is  thither  I  am  bound ;  I  am  hunting 
for  buffalo." 

"Why,  my  little  brother,  so  am  I!  Over  here,  not  far 
away,  is  a  clump  of  trees,  and  it  is  there  where  I  am 
going  for  buffalo.  Well,  my  little  brother,  I  will  go  along 
with  you.  Not  till  at  yonder  place  after  a  while  will  I 
part  company  from  you."  Then  he  was  addressed  by  the 
other  saying :  "  All  right,  come  along,  Nanabushu !  let  us 
be  going !" 

Thereupon  then  were  they  off.  Amazingly  big,  they 
say,  was  the  bladder  (pouch)  which  the  other  had  dangling 
from  his  belt ;  indeed,  they  say  it  tossed,  whirling  about 
over  the  top  of  his  crotch  at  the  back  (as  he  walked  along). 
When  they  came  out  upon  the  summit  of  the  ridge,  they 
say  the  other  suddenly  crouched  down  (to  the  ground). 
"Nanabushu,  already  yonder  at  the  foot  of  the  hill  are  the 
buffaloes  trailing  along." 

WThen  they  turned  about  on  their  way  back,  "My  son, 
now,  one  of  you  should  shoot  a  buffalo,  for  then  we  can 
have  something  to  eat."  l 

Then  suddenly,  they  say,  out  leaped  a  man  from  his 
place  in  the  bladder  (pouch),  and  away  he  went  running 
down  the  slope  into  yonder  valley.  And  all  at  once,  they 
say,  from  over  the  top  of  yonder  ridge  came  a  buffalo 
along;  it  was  in  flight. 

"Come  along,   Nanabushu!   let  us  be  going!" 

1  The  stranger  speaking  to  his  sons  in   the   "bladder." 


366 

Sagatciwawat  klnwan  klnlbawiwan  Ini/a  ininiwan-,  klcingi- 
cinon  klnwaa  !ni/u  piji'kiwan.      Anlc,  mlsa  krtrdisawat  ima. 

"  'A11,    amba    ningwis,   pindigan   <y<rma."      Mlsa'  klplndi- 
gakwaskunit    ima   wlskwang,    "Anlc,   Nanabuc,  mlsa  cigwa 
5   tciwlninutcigayang."     Migu    iu    kinwan    wa-rcimadandciganit 
klgaski. 

"Ta,   niclm  !  kidagabacimanansa  !"     Ajikanonigut :   "Wa- 
gunac,   Nanabuc,  kayabatci'toyang  tcigabacimang  ?" 

"Niclm,  mnganana  a'kik."     A'pana,  klwan,   a-irsadciwat 
10  ima  ucadinanik.      A'kikon   uglpita'kunan   Nanabucu. 


"Anln  dac  lisi/u  ickuta,  Nanabuc?" 

"Ninga'irji'ton,   niclm." 

Kl'u-ndcipa'kwanani    kinwan,    iu  ickuta  ima.      Anlc,   mlsa 

mlnawa  nipinatit  Nanabucu,  mlsa  klpltot  nipi.      Mlsa  pota- 

15   'kwawat  piji'kiwan;  kawln  ka'kina  upota'kwaslnawan.   Anlc, 

mlgu    kinwan    ani'a^koglzisunit    ani'a'gwacimawat,    kayagu 

anipoda'kwawat.     Mlsa  klglziswawat  ka'kina. 


u  l  Au,   ningwis,   amba,   saga'a'm^k  tciwisiniyak." 
Caylgwa  kinwan,  ininiwan  sagatcikwaskwaniwan.    Alpidci 
20  klwan  wawlnga  nlmi'tanawawan  Nanabucu  agimat. 

"Nanabuc,  panima  klnawint  iskwatc  klgawlsinimin." 

"Kamavvin  ogou  uda/rskwamasiwawan,"  inan dam  Nanabucu. 
"Kawin,   Nanabuc,   klgatickwandamagomin  sa  win." 

Udasina'kan,  klnwan,  ackwantamawintwanin. 


367 

When  they  came  out  upon  the  summit,  they  say,  there 
stood  the  man ;  there  lay,  they  say,  the  buffalo.  Well, 
accordingly  (he  and  Nanabushu)  came  to  them  over  there. 

"All  right,  come  along,  my  son!  do  you  enter  into  this." 
And  so  when  (his  son)  leaped  into  the  bladder  pouch, 
"Well,  Nanabushu,  therefore  now  will  we  dress  the  meat." 
Accordingly  then,  they  say,  did  he  wish  to  begin  eating 
the  meat  raw. 

"Why,  my  little  brother!  we  should  cook  it  by  boiling!" 
Then  he  was  addressed  by  the  other  saying :  "  What, 
Nanabushu,  shall  we  use  to  boil  it  in?" 

"My  little  brother,  I  will  go  fetch  a  kettle."  Away, 
they  say,  then  went  he  over  yonder  ridge.  With  a  kettle 
in  his  hand,  back  Nanabushu  came. 

"Now,  where  is  the  fire,   Nanabushu?" 

"I   will  make  it,  my  little  brother." 

There  was  a  sudden  lift  of  smoke,  they  say ;  the  fire 
was  there.  Well,  so  then  next  for  water  Nanabushu  went, 
whereupon  he  fetched  water.  And  then  they  cooked  the 
buffalo  in  a  kettle ;  not  all  of  it  (at  one  time)  they  cooked 
in  the  kettle.  So  thereupon,  they  say,  just  as  fast  as  it 
was  done,  then  forth  from  the  kettle  they  took  it,  and 
then  some  more  they  put  in  to  boil.  And  so  they  finished 
cooking  it  all. 

"Now,  my  sons,  hither  come  you  forth,  that  you  may  eat." 

Presently,  they  say,  the  men  came  leaping  out.  Exactly 
forty  in  all,  they  say,  was  what  Nanabushu  counted  them 
(to  be). 

"Nanabushu,  not  till  after  (they  have)  finished  will  you 
and  I  then  eat." 

"Perhaps  there  will  not  be  any  left,"  thought  Nanabushu. 

"Nay,  Nanabushu,  we  shall  really  have  some  saved 
for  us." 

The  chest,   they  say,  was  saved  for  them. 


368 

"Ambasa,  Nanabuc,  wlsinita." 

Anlc  misa'   klkitanawawat  kaya  wmawa. 

"Ambasano,  niclm,   awrrcin  nindocimag  nlctana."  l 

"Anln  dac,   Nanabuc,  kidayanina  wlskwa1?" 
5        "Minanga,  niclm,   nindaiyan." 

Migu  iu  klnwan  ima  iji'tat  kagwanisa  mangimigatini  kPwa11 
wlskwa1  ta'kunaminit.    U'AU,  ningwis!  nlctana  saga-a/mu'k." 


Misa  nlctana  kisaga'a/minit. 
"  CAU,   amba,   plndigak,   ningwis!" 
10        Ga'kina  kigimi'tigwabiwan. 

"Ambasano,  Nanabuc,  ayangwamisin !    Kini'tababini'tam. 
Taga,  kagux  katciba'kwayanin,  tagandankan  kmi'tam." 

"Taya,    niclm!    kawm    nindaijictcigasl.      Panima  sagu^ku 
iskwatc  ningawlsin." 

"15        "Anlc,    mlsagu    kaya    km    a'pana    kago    kigaki'tcipisun. 
Nanabuc,  kita'i'man  ka'kina  klzi'kan." 

Anlc  mlsa  ka'kina  klglsi'kank  Nanabucu  uda'i-man. 
atAu,   ambasa,   Nanabuc!   madcata !" 

Ajimadcawat.    Taya!  wandagu  kiwa  anra'yabanabandank 
20  kati'tibisanik    ima    pasanagitiyat.      Anlc,    ml  klnwan,   anipa- 
'kawinitiwat. 

Caylgwa    Nanabucu    sagatciwat    ima    piji'kiwan    klpima- 
wanitiwan,    pimitanantciganit.      Aji'a-caklwat.      u '  Au,   pajik- 
sana,    nindojimitug !    uta/u'pimwan    piji'kiwag  ima  pimawa- 
25   nitiwag." 

Sagitcikvvaskwaniwan  klnwan  pajik  udociman  ;   pana  iwiti 
ajipasatinanik    ani'a-'pa'tonit.      Wibagu    klnwan    sagatciwa- 


3^9 

"Come,  Nanabushu,  let  us  eat!" 

So  thereupon  they  ate  up  all  (their  share)  too. 

"I  beg  of  you,  my  little  brother,  do  you  lend  me  twenty 
of  my  nephews."  1 

"And  so,   Nanabushu,   have  you  a  bladder  (pouch)?" 

"Certainly,   my  little  brother,   I  have  one." 

Accordingly,  they  say,  on  his  reaching  to  feel  for  it,  a 
tremendously  large  rounded  bladder,  they  say,  was  (Nana 
bushu)  holding  in  his  hand.  "All  right,  my  sons!  twenty 
of  you  come  out." 

Thereupon  twenty  came  out. 

"Now,   come,  do  you  go  inside,2  my  sons!" 

All  of  them  had  bows  and  arrows. 

"I  beseech  you,  Nanabushu,  do  you  be  careful!  You 
are  not  good  at  giving  heed.  Now,  do  not,  when  you 
have  finished  cooking,  taste  of  the  food  first." 

"Why,  my  little  brother!  I  would  not  do  (such  a  thing). 
Not  till  the  very  last  will  I  ever  eat." 

"Now,  therefore,  shall  you  always  have  something  for  a 
girdle.  Nanabushu,  all  your  clothes  do  you  now  take  off." 

So  accordingly  all  of  his  clothes   Nanabushu  removed. 

"Now,  then,  come  along,  Nanabushu!  let  us  be  going!" 

Then  they  departed.  Ah!  it  was  a  sight,  they  say,  as 
he  went  along  looking  behind  at  the  bladder  (pouch)  that 
rolled  about  over  the  upper  part  of  his  crotch  at  the  back. 
So  then,  it  is  said,  they  separated,  each  going  his  way. 

When  Nanabushu  came  out  upon  yonder  summit,  (he 
saw)  the  buffaloes  go  trailing  by,  feeding  as  they  went. 
Then  he  retraced  his  way.  "Now,  O  my  nephews!  let 
one  of  you  go  shoot  the  buffaloes  that  are  trailing  along 
over  there." 

It  is  said  that  out  leaped  one  of  his  nephews ;  away  he 
went  running  down  the  slope  into  yonder  valley.  Then, 

1  Indicating  thus  that  they  were  human  beings.  2  Into  Nanabushu's  pouch. 

24 — PUBL.    AMER.    ETHN.    SOC.    VOL.    VII. 


370 

kwaskwaniwan  piji'kiwan  iwiti  ucatinanik.  Mayatcagwanltug 
Nanabucu ;  sagatciwat,  uglnlbawi'tawanini  piji'kiwan  udoci- 
man.  Misa  klwudisat.  "'A11,  amba,  nindojim !  plndigan 
ima  andayag." 


5  *  Anicina,  misa  cigwa  madciwminu'tcigat  Nanabuc.  Kaki- 
ci'kawat  ajipotawat;  ajinanata'kikon.  Amc,  misa  ka'tagwi- 
cing-,  caylgwa  ajipota'kwat  piji'kiwan.  Misa  anra-'kokisi- 
sunit,  ani-a-gwacimat,  kaya  anipoda'kwat.  Anlc  misa  ka- 
'kina  klkljiswat.  " l  Au,  nindojimitug !  amba  wisini'k." 


10  Pangi  Itug  pa'kwapitogwan  ima  wininowaninik  tcica'kamut. 
Udojiman  matandciganit,  misa  ajra*mabinit  caylgwa.  Misa 
kaya  win  caylgwa  Nanabucu  madantcigat.  Anlcna,  misa 
kltabisimt  Nanabucu.  u 'Au,  amba,  nindojimitug!  plndigak 
andayag." 


15  Misa  ka'pindiganit,  ajimadcat  Nanabucu.  Wandagu 
klwan  katanwawanik  utiyang  Nanabuju  udojiman  maml- 
gatinigwan.  Misa  papimusat  Nanabucu,  ningutingigu  pan- 
gi'towan  udojiman.  Sagatciwat  klnwan  piji'kiwan  klpima- 
wanitiwan.  Aja'tagwanltug.  "  'Au,  nindojimitug!  pajiksana 

20  uda'u'bimwan  pij^kiwan."  Awaniban  kakanonigut  awiya. 
Ajiyabiskwlt  iu  ugitcipisun,  misa  kawln  awiya  udociman. 
Madclba'togwan  Nanabucu,  nantuba'a't  uclmayan.  Saga- 
tciwaba'tot  klnwan  kl'pimusawan  uclmayan.  Anlcna  misa 
ima  klna'kwackawat.  "Amn,  Nanabuc?"  udigdn. 


in  a  little  while,  it  is  said  that  upon  the  summit  of  yonder 
ridge  came  loping  a  buffalo.  Nanabushu  must  have  departed 
thither ;  (for)  when  he  came  out  upon  the  summit,  there 
was  his  nephew  standing  beside  the  buffalo.  Thereupon 
he  went  up  to  where  he  was.  "All  right,  come,  my  nephew! 
enter  in  where  you  (and  the  rest)  stay." 

Well,  of  course  it  was  then  that  Nanabushu  began  dressing 
the  meat.  After  finishing  his  work  on  (the  buffalo),  he 
then  built  a  fire ;  then  he  went  to  fetch  a  kettle.  Well, 
and  then  he  came  back ;  presently  he  had  the  buffalo 
cooking  in  the  kettle.  Accordingly,  as  fast  as  it  was  done, 
he  took  it  out,  and  put  in  some  more  to  boil.  So  there 
upon  he  finished  cooking  it  all.  "Now,  O  my  nephews! 
come,  do  you  eat." 

It  was  perhaps  but  a  small  piece  that  he  pulled  off  to 
put  into  his  mouth.  His  nephews  then  began  eating,  but 
they  ceased  eating  in  a  little  while.  Thereupon  Nana 
bushu  then  began  eating  too.  Well,  and  then  Nanabushu 
had  all  he  wanted  to  eat.  "All  right,  come  along,  O  my 
nephews !  do  you  enter  in  where  you  live." 

Whereupon,  when  they  went  in,  then  departed  Nanabushu. 
There  was  somewhat  of  a  noise  at  Nanabushu's  buttocks, 
(made  by)  his  nephews,  who  evidently  were  engaged  in 
zealous  play.  And  so,  as  Nanabushu  went  along,  by  and 
by  his  nephews  ceased  their  noise.  As  he  came  out  upon 
the  summit,  it  is  said  the  buffaloes  went  trailing  by.  Then 
he  must  have  withdrawn.  "Now,  O  my  nephews!  let  one 
of  you  shoot  a  buffalo."  But  from  none  was  he  given 
answer.  When  he  took  off  his  belt,  there  was  no  one 
of  his  nephews  (left).  Away  started  Nanabushu,  evidently 
on  the  run,  to  find  his  little  brother.  As  he  ran  out  upon 
the  hill-top,  they  say  hither  came  walking  his  little  brother. 
And  so  of  course  it  was  there  that  he  met  him.  "What 
(is  it),  Nanabushu?"  he  was  tolcl. 


372 

u  Niwanra'gsa  nindocimag  !" 
"  Kiglninawatclna  mlnawa  ?" 


" 


"Kawmina  tcigltangataman  iu  kanawatclyag  ? 

5        "Kawln,  niclm,  nintatangandasin." 

"  Kawln,   kigitarigandansagu  tcibwamitciwat." 
"  Kitagwicinogsawln  oma  ka'kina.      Niclm,  taga,  awi'i'dn 
mlnawa  !" 

"Kawin  kita'a-wi-i'sinon  mlnawa." 

10  Nanabucu  Itug  kwayaskwanutamugwan  i  wlskvva1  wlma- 
'kamat  ;  a'ta  !  wandagu,  klnwan,  amon  kawanitclsamigut. 
"  Ya,  ya,  ya!"  1  Wandagu  kiwan  kapabacacagawikanapagisut. 
Udacipaji'kukagon  3  nimitana  amon,  misa  klponrrgut. 
Ki'tci-a-mowasiswan  kinwan  ima  kl'a-'tani.  Nanabucu,  itug, 
15  ningutci  ajimadcagwan.  Ajikigitut:  "Acimadcl  win  wawiyac 
ningitotagok  amowicag!" 


Misa1  a'kosit. 

SERIES  VII.     Nos.  44-56. 
44.    NANABUSHU    AND    THE    WOLVES.S 

Ninguting     a'i'ntaawag     wlgiwaming     Nanaboju     osani, 

Kwasind,  wlwan  gaya  nlnj  uskinawag  gaya,  Nanaboju  mlna- 

20  wadac  Paninl.     Monjag  nandawandcigawag,  awaslyan  nisa- 

wat;  mi'tigvvabln  odabatci'a-wan  pimwawat  awaslan -- pina- 

wan,  clciban,  nfkan,  anotcigago  oni'tonawa.     Kinwanj  ki'ta- 

1  The  cry  made  by  Niinabushu.  -  The  father  of  the  other  forty  bees. 


373 

"Why,   I  have  lost  my  nephews!" 

"Did  you  have  another  bite  to  eat?" 

"Yes." 

"Did  you  not  first  taste  of  what  you  (and  the  others) 
had  to  eat?" 

"No,   my  little  brother,   I  would  not  taste  of  it  (first)." 

"Nay,  but  you  really  did  taste  it  before  they  ate." 

"They  have  really  all  got  here  now.  My  little  brother, 
come,  do  let  me  have  the  use  of  them  again !" 

"I  would  not  let  you  have  them  again." 

Nanabushu  doubtless  made  a  grab  for  the  bladder  to 
take  it  from  him ;  but  oh !  at  that  instant,  they  say,  by  the 
bees  was  he  stung  all  over.  "Ya,  ya,  ya!"1  How  they 
say  he  did  wriggle  at  the  back  when  down  he  fell.  He 
was  harassed  by  one 2  and  forty  bees,  and  then  he  was 
let  alone.  A  large  beehive  they  say  was  there.  As 
Nanabushu,  without  doubt,  was  starting  off  somewhere  else, 
he  then  said:  "Well,  by  jingo  !  I  have  been  played  a  trick 
by  the  wretched  bees." 

And  that  is  as  far  as  (the  story)  goes. 


SERIES  VII.     Nos.  44-56. 
44.    NANABUSHU    AND    THE    WOLVES.S 

Once  on  a  time  in  a  wigwam  dwelt  Nanabushu's  father, 
Kwasind,  with  his  wife  and  two  youths,  Nanabushu  and 
also  Panini.  Often  they  went  hunting,  (and)  game  they 
killed;  bow  and  arrows  they  used  when  they  shot  at  the 
game-kind,  —  at  ruffed  grouse,  ducks,  geese,  —  and  various 
kinds  of  them  they  killed.  A  long  while  they  tarried  there. 

3  For  other  versions  see  Nos.  8  (p.   73),  9  (p.  85),  30  (p.   235). 


374 

wag    iman.      Kaga'pi    Nanabojo   odinan   osan :    "Nose,   nin- 
gamadca." 

"Andi  wa-rjayan?" 

"Niwibabamadis." 

"Pocga  gin   madcan." 

5  Nanaboju  ka/rjimadcat ;  miziwe  grrca,  omi'tigwabm 
udayawan.  Onodcigago  wani'ton  madcit.  Ningodingidac 
wlgiwam  owambandan,  medac  udoda'pinan  obigwa'k  uma- 
dwa'a-n  ickwandam. 

Madwa  gigito  i'kwa :    "Pmdigan!"  i'kido. 
10        Ka/rjipindigat  Nanabojo,   owabaman  i'kwawan  mnj  kayii 

abinotciya8.      Pkwa  ogioda'pinan  mi'tig;  i'kwa  upa'ki'tawan 

o'kading,   mamackut. 

"Kagu7,  kagux !"  i'kido  Nanaboju.      "Ningantawandciga," 

i'kito     Nanaboju.       Medac     ka'ijinisat    unltcanisan    bajak, 
15   mri'dac     ka'i'ji'o'ci'tod     ku'ka'a'wan,     klngon    ku'ka'a'wan, 

mbiwa  gaya  wlgup  plmana'kwan,  migiskanan  gaya.     Midac 

gru  ci'tod    ubimiwanan.       "Ki'tcigitcigamlng    ningabagitabi. 

Nisagwa    klngonyag   mngabinag,   tciwisiniwad  abinontci'a-g. 

Nanagonaga'k  ningatagwicin." 

20  Medac  kimadcad.  Nltamidac  tapi'kadinig  kigabaci ; 
kiniba.  Wayabamnigidac  kl'a'nimadca ;  kwaya'k  klwadi- 
nung  ija.  Kikijab,  tclbwanawe'kwag,  klmadabi  saga'i'gan. 
Uglwabaman  niswi  ma'Tngana8  pimi'pa'tonit  •  oganawaba- 
man.  0,  plpagi  Nanaboju:  "A,  pa/ka,  mtci !  Plciyu'k!" 


25  Ma'i'nganag  kanonitiwag  :  "A,  mlawe  Nanaboju!"  Pajik 
alkiwanzi  ma'i'ngan,  nljwi  ugwisa8  ma-i-nganag.  "Kagi/, 
kagur  kanonalkagun.  Madcag,  madcag  !" 


375 

At  last  Nanabushu  said  to  his  father:  ttO  father!  I  am 
going  away." 

"Where  do  you  expect  to  go?" 

"I  want  to  go  upon  a  journey." 

"If  it  be  your  pleasure,  then  go  on." 

Nanabushu  then  started  away  •  everywhere  he  went, 
his  bow  and  arrows  he  took  along.  Of  the  various  kinds 
(of  game)  he  killed  he  ate.  So  once  on  a  time  a  wigwam 
he  saw,  whereupon  he  took  his  arrow  (and)  with  it  was 
heard  knocking  on  the  door. 

The  voice  of  a  woman  called:   "Come  in!"  she  said. 

After  Nanabushu  went  in,  he  saw  a  woman  and  two 
children.  The  woman  picked  up  a  stick;  the  woman  struck 
them  on  the  leg,  first  one,  then  the  other. 

"Don't,  don't!"  said  Nanabushu.  "I  am  going  off  on 
a  hunt  for  game,"  said  Nanabushu.  And  so  after  she  had 
slain  one  of  her  children,  he  then  fixed  up  some  bait, 
some  fish-bait,  and  also  a  large  amount  of  linden-bark 
twine,  and  some  hooks.  Thereupon  he  made  up  his  pack. 
"In  the  sea  I  am  going  to  lay  a  line  of  bone  hooks. 
The  fish  I  kill  I  will  fetch  home,  that  the  children  may  eat. 
In  five  days  I  will  return." 

Thereupon  he  started  away.  The  first  time  that  night 
came  on,  there  he  stopped  to  camp;  he  slept.  And  then 
in  the  morning  he  started  on  ;  straight  towards  the  region 
of  the  north  wind  he  went.  In  the  morning,  before  it 
was  noon,  he  came  out  upon  a  lake.  He  saw  three 
Wolves  running  along ;  he  gazed  at  them.  Oh,  then 
out  cried  Nanabushu :  "  Hey,  hold  on,  my  friends !  Wait 
for  me!" 

The  Wolves  spoke  one  to  another,  saying:  "Why,  that 
is  Nanabushu !"  One  was  an  old  Wolf,  and  two  (other) 
Wolves  (were)  his  sons.  "Don't,  don't  you  speak  to  him! 
Keep  on  going,  keep  on  going!" 


376 

A,    ki'tcipimipa'to    Nanaboju!      Mlnawa  bibagi :    "Pa'ka, 
pa'ka,   nltci !      Prrcln  a'kawe,   klwi'kanonin  !" 

Kaga'pi  krkibitcigapawi. 

A    Nanaboju   gltagwicin  ima.      "A,  bonjo,   bonjo,   nltci!" 
5   Kaya   odojima8  Nanaboju  ogagwadciman :    "Andi  ajayag?" 

"O,  wasa  wabanung." 

"Anm  ajini'kadag?" 

"  Kici'kidigwanicing." 

"Wa!"   Nanaboju  i'keto,    "mri'wide  gaya  nm   ijayan." 

10        Ma-rngan    ogagwadciman   Nanabojon  :    "Wagonan  kabi- 
mondaman  ?" 

"  Nlmblndcigosan   kabimondaman." 

'A,  Nanaboju  i'kido :  "Klgawldclwininim.  Wagunan 
nandawabandamag  ?  Kaya  nln  mri'widi  ajayan." 
15  "Nibinung  krki'o'sawag  kidocimag ;  nlbiwa  awaslyan 
oginisawan ;  mldac  nlbiwa  wiyas  pa'tag  pimita  gaya  mldac 
klasandcigowad ;  mlwanjiicayang.  Mlnawadac,  wikiwusawag 
kidocimag."  Mi'i/>u  a'kidot  lasau  a'kiwa^simaTngan. 

"Wa,"   Nanaboju  i'kido,    "Klgawldciwlninim." 
20        "A,    kawin !"  i'kido  a'kiw^sima'rngan.      "Kawin  kldati- 
bi'a'sig  kitocimag." 

"  'A8a,   manon  !      Ningabimiba'to  gaya  nln." 
"Amc,   bocka  kin." 

Ajimadcawad    rnaTnganag   pimipa'towad.     Ani'ku'piwat 
25   ododa'pinan  obimiwanan  ogra-'pagiton  mi'tigong.    "Pi'kwan- 
dagag  ta'i'cini'kada  tci-a'i'na'kiwang." 


Mldac  glmadcawad.     Monjag  plmipa'towag  ma'rnganag, 


377 

Oh,  with  what  great  speed  then  ran  Nanabushu!  Once 
more  he  cried  aloud:  "Hold  on,  hold  on,  my  friends! 
Wait  for  me  awhile,  I  wish  to  speak  with  you!" 

Finally  (the  old   Wolf)  stopped  and  stood. 

So  Nanabushu  arrived  over  there.     "Well,  halloo,  halloo 
my    friends!"     And    of   his  nephews   Nanabushu  inquired: 
"Where  are  you  going?" 

"Oh,  far  away  towards  the  dawn." 

"What  is  the  name  of  the  place?" 

"Place  of  Cedar-Knots." 

"Oh!"  Nanabushu  said,  "that  is  the  very  place  where 
I  too  am  going." 

The  Wolf  asked  Nanabushu:  "What  are  you  carrying 
on  your  back?" 

"My  bag  (with  personal  belongings)  is  what  I  have  on 
my  back." 

Why,  Nanabushu  said:  "I  will  go  along  with  you.  What 
are  you  looking  for?  I  too  am  bound  for  that  place." 

"Last  summer  on  a  hunt  were  your  nephews;  much 
game  they  killed,  and  a  good  deal  of  dry  meat  and  grease 
was  what  they  cached ;  that  is  what  we  are  going  there 
for.  Furthermore,  on  another  hunt  your  nephews  wish  to 
go."  Thus  spoke  the  old  Wolf. 

"Oh,"   Nanabushu  said,    "I  am  going  along  with  you." 

"Oh,  no!"  said  the  old  Wolf.  "You  cannot  keep  pace 
with  your  nephews." 

"Ha,   ha!   never  mind!      I   myself  will  run  too." 

"Very  well,  just  as  you  please." 

Then  off  started  the  Wolves  running.  As  they  went 
their  way  up  from  the  shore,  he  picked  up  his  pack  (and) 
flung  it  upon  a  log.  "  Pinus  resinosa^]  shall  it  be  called 
till  the  end  of  the  world." 

Thereupon  they  started  off.  Always  running  were  the 
Wolves,  and  Nanabushu  himself  ran  with  great  speed. 


378 

Nanaboju  gaya  win  gi'tcipimipa'to.      Mlnawa  bejik  saga'r- 
gan  omadablnawa ;   kwaya'k  nawa'kwam  krijawag. 

Anlcinabeg  Ima  tawag,  owabamawan  maTngana8.    "  Hehe, 
naska  maTnganag  pamipa'towad  !      Nlwiwag,  nlwin  !" 

5        Nanaboju  gaya  owa  dodam  oni'kan  owa  bapimipa'tot. 

Mlnawa  blpagi  anicinaba :   "Anm  ejinagusicl  bajik  ma'l'n- 
gan?  kawingagu   osowasi !" 
A,  pa'piwag  anicinabeg! 
"Skamldog  Nanaboju!" 

10  Kwaya'k  klmadcawag.  A,  aja  aya'kusi  Nanaboju!  A'pi- 
dac  wranagucig  kfkabeciwag.  A'pitci  ajikisinag  tcigiblg 
saga'i'ganing  mri'ma  kl'kabaciwad.  Kawmgago  skude. 
Pang!  klmuni'kawag  koni'kang,  mri'ma  klkawlcimowad. 
Gaya  win  Nanaboju  pangl  klmoni'ka  koni'kang,  mima  glka- 
1 5  wicimud.  A'pitci  aya'kusi,  alpitci  kaya  kiabwasu,  klki'tci- 
pimi'pa'tot.  Kawln  okaskitosin  tcinipat ;  caylgwa  klgatci, 
ki'tcigl'katci. 


A'kiw^zima'rngan    oganonan    ogwisisan.       "T^ga,    awi 
pacig  ki'konas." 

20  Ma'i'nganans  Inanowa  pagiso  Nanabucon  nibamt.  A ! 
Nanaboju  a'pitci  kicozi.  Midac  kmibat.  Mldac  koskusit 
a'pitcabwaso.  Midac  a'kidot,  ningutci  odapagiton  ma'i'n- 
ganozo:  "Tiwa!  kaga't  ki'tcabwaskagun  animwanu."  Mi'nawa 
glniba  Nanabucu.  Mlnawa  kuskuzi,  apitci  mlnawa  gfkatci. 


25        lA8au  ma'rnganans  Ima  nlba.      Midac  minawa  Nanabuju 
uwi'ktibidon  ma'i'nganuzu  wra'gwajat,      lA8au  ma'i'nganans 


379 

Out  upon  another  lake  they  came,  straight  across  the  ice 
they  made  their  way. 

Some  people  were  abiding  at  the  place  :  they  saw  the 
Wolves.  "Halloo,  see  the  Wolves  that  are  running  by! 
They  are  four,  four  (is  their  number)  !" 

And  Nanabushu  was  using  his  hand  as  he  went  run 
ning  by. 

Again  yelled  the  people:  "Like  what  is  the  look  of 
one  of  the  Wolves?  He  is  entirely  with  a  tail!" 

Oh,   how  the  people  laughed! 

"It  must  be  Nanabushu!" 

Straight  on  they  kept  going.  Oh,  but  how  tired  now 
was  Nanabushu  becoming !  When  it  was  evening,  they 
made  camp.  Where  it  was  exceedingly  cold  by  the  shore 
of  a  lake  was  the  place  where  they  camped.  There  was 
no  fire.  A  shallow  place  in  the  snow  they  dug,  and  that 
was  where  they  lay  down  to  sleep.  Likewise  Nanabushu 
dug  a  shallow  place  in  the  snow,  and  there  he  lay  down 
to  sleep.  Very  tired  he  was,  and  very  much  was  he 
sweating,  for  hard  had  he  been  running.  He  was  not 
able  to  sleep ;  now  was  he  becoming  chilled,  ever  so  cold 
was  he. 

The  old  Wolf  spoke  to  his  little  son,  saying:  "I  say,  lend 
him  one  of  your  blankets." 

The  little  Wolf  threw  his  tail  over  where  Nanabushu 
lay  asleep.  Ah!  but  Nanabushu  then  became  exceedingly 
warm.  Upon  that  he  went  to  sleep.  And  when  he  awoke, 
he  was  in  a  very  heavy  sweat.  Whereupon  he  said,  as 
he  flung  aside  the  wolf-tail :  "  Good  gracious !  certainly  a 
great  producer  of  sweat  is  the  dog-tail."  Once  more  to 
sleep  went  Nanabushu.  Again  he  awoke,  so  very  cold 
was  he  again. 

The  little  Wolf  over  there  was  asleep.  Thereupon  once 
more  Nanabushu  pulled  on  the  wolf-tail  to  cover  (himself). 


38o 

idac  ning-utci  krrnanowa  pagizu.  "Nongum  ku'ca  anim- 
wanu  kititan." 

A !   midac  mlnawa  klgl'katcit   Nanabuju. 

Pidclnagigu  padabung,  madwabasigwiwag ;  madwababa- 
5  wlwag.  Medac  glmadwamadcawad,  a'kiwanzimaTngan 
glgito :  "Amba,  Nanabuju,  uniskan!  Aja  glmadcawag 
kidocimag." 

O,   mlnawa  gimadca   Nanabuju  mamawi.      Mlnawa  gike- 

'tcibimipa'to    Nanabuju  kabaglcik.      Minawadac  wanagucig 

10  krr'kido    a'kiw^zima'i'ngan,    oganonan    ogwisan :     "Wlni- 

'tam    klmicoma'i'wa  oga'O'nabandan   anindi  tcigabaciyang." 

Midac  uskinawama'rngan :  "Unabandan  anindi  tcigaba- 
ciyang." 

Midac  Nanabuju  kru'nabandang  apitci  tibinawanig,  apitci 
15   cingobikang.      "Mlsa  oma  tcigabaciyang." 

Mri'ma  klnibawad.  Ayabi'tatibiga'k  kimadwa'irnickawag 
uskinawag  ma'rnganag,  krkatciwag.  Klmadwamadcawag. 
Kigicabidac  glgito  a'kiw^zima'rngan  :  "Amba,  Nanabuju! 
aja  klnaganigomin.  Aja  wasa  ayadoganag  kitocimag." 


20  Midac  gimadcawad  atkiwanziag.  Ogimi'kawawan  tcigibig 
saga'i'ganing  ajlkisinag  tlnung.  Mlidac  mlnawa  kra-ni- 
madcawad  maxmawi.  A!  gi'tcipimipa'to  Nanabuju.  Nanin- 
gutinung  wasa  nagana,  ubabri'gundaci'ku  witcikiwanyan. 
"Gicfkan,  gicfkan  Nanabuju!" 


25  Midac  mmawa  wanagucig  ki'kabaciwad.  Midac  a'kidot 
a'kiwa^zimaTngan.  Oganonan  Nanabujon  :  aMri/<u  wabang 
tciodi'tamang  ajayang." 


The    little   Wolf  then  drew  away  his  tail.      "It  was  but  a 
moment  ago  that  you  called  it  a  dog-tail." 

Ah!  then  once  more  Nanabushu  became  cold. 

And  as  soon  as  the  dawn  was  appearing,  then  began 
the  sound  of  them  getting  up ;  they  could  be  heard  shaking 
themselves.  And  while  they  could  be  heard  starting  away, 
the  old  Wolf  said:  "Come,  Nanabushu,  get  up  (from  bed)! 
Already  have  your  nephews  started  away." 

Well,  once  more  started  Nanabushu,  together  with  them. 
Again  with  great  speed  ran  Nanabushu  all  the  day  long. 
And  on  the  next  evening  said  the  old  Wolf,  he  spoke  to 
his  sons,  saying:  "It  is  your  uncle's  turn  to  look  for  a 
place  where  we  shall  camp." 

Thereupon  the  young  Wolf  (said):  "Go  look  for  a  place 
where  we  are  to  camp." 

And  so  Nanabushu  went  to  find  a  place  where  it  was 
very  calm,  where  there  was  a  very  dense  growth  of  balsam- 
trees.  "Therefore  here  is  a  place  where  we  will  camp." 

Then  there  was  where  they  slept.  In  the  middle  of 
the  night  there  arose  a  sound  of  the  young  Wolves  getting 
up,  for  they  were  cold.  They  could  be  heard  starting 
away.  And  in  the  morning  up  spoke  the  old  Wolf:  "Come, 
Nanabushu !  we  have  now  been  left  behind.  Now  far  away 
must  be  your  nephews." 

Whereupon  then  off  started  the  elders.  They  found  the 
others  at  the  shore  of  a  lake  in  a  cold  part  of  the  place. 
And  then  once  more  they  started  on  their  way  all  together. 
Ah !  with  great  speed  went  running  Nanabushu.  Sometimes 
afar  he  was  left  behind,  and  so  continually  was  he  waited 
for  by  his  companions.  "Walk  fast,  walk  fast,  Nanabushu!" 

Thereupon  on  the  next  evening  they  went  into  camp. 
And  then  spoke  the  old  W'olf.  He  addressed  Nanabushu, 
saying :  "  Now,  to-morrow  is  when  we  shall  arrive  at  the 
place  whither  we  are  bound." 


382 

Gigijap  kimadcawag  mamawi.  A !  minawa  pimipa'to 
Nanabucu.  Naya'ir'kwag,  kimadablwag  pacig  saga-rgan. 
Owabamawan  namadabinit  micawa'kwam.  Klgito  alkiwanzi- 
maTngan :  "Nacka,  Nanabuju!  kanabatc  mlca/a'tcigawa^ 

O    •  •  J  •  •  •  O  •  c> 

5  kidocimag."  Mldac  kl'a*niodisawad  Ima  namadabinit. 
A'kiw^zima'rngan  anidada  dagi'kwani,  ominaman  mozon. 
Gaya  win  Nanaboju  ml  andodang.  Ogandnigon  dac  wldci- 
kiwayan :  "Klminamana  monz?" 


"Ayen8,"  ilkido. 
10        "Anm  andaciwad?"  i'kido   a'kiw^zima-rngan. 

"Nisiwag"    i'kido    Nanaboju,    "pacig  nojas  nijidac  mani- 


cansag." 


"Kawin,"  i'kido  a'kiw^zirna'rngan,  "pacigwaya'ta  monz." 

Mldac    klmadciba'towad    uskinawiig,    kaya    winawa  a'ki- 

15   wanzimaTngan    Nanabuju    gaya,   nlgan  winawa  uskinawag. 

Mri'dac    aca   klmadcat  mons,   mlidac  no%pinanawat  monzon 

uskinawapf.     Udinan  dac  Nanabucon  ma*rnoran  :  "Aniinabin 

o  •  o  • 

wawani."      Ningutingi'gu    owabandanawa    ma*rngan    wlpit 
pata'ka'kwisinig   mi'tigung.     Mldac  a'kidot  a4kiwanzimai'n- 

20  gan :    "Taga  uta'pinan   kidojim  udasawan." 

Nanabujo  dac  i'kido  :    "Anin  gadodaman  animwabit?" 

A'kiwanzima'rngan  dac  uwrkupidon  midac  kaijipa'pa- 
winank  asawan,  apitcunicicin  asawan.  Wayabandan  idac 
Nanabujo  ilkido :  "Taga  nln,  ningadanita'kunan  mndojim 
25  odasawan  !" 

A'kiwanzi  idac  i'kido  :  "Nongum  kuca  animwabit  kiditan. 
Animadcani^u !" 

o 


Mldac    animadcawat.      Mlnawadac  wabandanawa  maTn- 


383 

In  the  morning  they  set  out  together.  Ah!  once  more 
on  the  run  started  Nanabushu.  When  it  was  noon,  they 
came  out  upon  a  lake.  They  beheld  some  one  seated 
far  out  on  the  ice.  Up  spoke  the  old  Wolf:  "Look,  Nana 
bushu!  maybe  your  nephews  have  shot  and  hit  something." 
Thereupon  they  kept  on  till  they  reached  the  place  where 
the  being  was  sitting.  The  old  Wolf  had  his  head  up, 
looking  about,  for  he  scented  a  moose.  And  Nanabushu 
himself  did  the  same.  So  he  was  addressed  by  his  com 
panion  saying:  "Do  you  smell  a  moose?" 

"Yes,"  he  said. 

"  How  many  are  they  ?"  said  the  old  Wolf. 

"They  are  three,"  said  Nanabushu,  -  "one  cow  and 
two  calves." 

"No,"  said   the  old   Wolf,    "there  is  but  one   moose." 

Thereupon  off  running  started  the  youths,  likewise  the 
old  Wolf  and  Nanabushu  too,  ahead  (went)  the  youths. 
In  the  mean  time  away  had  gone  the  moose,  and  so  after 
the  moose  ran  the  youths.  To  Nanabushu  then  said  the 
Wolf:  "As  you  go,  keep  a  careful  look."  Once  as  (they 
were  going  along)  they  saw  a  wolf-tooth  sticking  from  a 
tree.  Whereupon  said  the  old  Wolf:  "I  say,  take  up  your 
nephew's  pointed  arrow !" 

And  Nanabushu  said:  "What  am  I  to  do  with  a  dog 
tooth  ?" 

The  old  Wolf  then  pulled  it  out.  And  so,  after  he  had 
shaken  the  pointed  arrow,  very  nice  was  the  arrow.  W7hen 
he  saw  it,  then  Nanabushu  said:  "I  say,  let  me  carry  my 
nephew's  arrow  as  we  go  along !" 

The  old  man  then  said :  "  Only  a  moment  ago  you 
called  it  a  do^-tooth.  Do  O-Q  on  !" 

£>  o 

Whereupon  they  started  on  their  way.  And  then  on 
another  occasion  they  saw  where  a  wolf  had  eased  himself 
as  he  went  along.  Thereupon  said  the  old  Wolf:  "Come, 


gan  kra'nimlzid.     Mldac  a'kidot  alkiwanzimaTngan :  "Taga, 
Nanabucu !   anita'kunan  kidojim  umatatasan." 

Midac  a'kidot  Nanabuju:   "Anln  kadodaman  animomo1?" 

Mldac    alkiwanzi    ugi'trda'pinan.      Mldac   kipa'pawinang, 
5   midac    madatasan    ka/u'ndinat.      A'pldac    Nanabucu   waya- 
bamat    madatasan,    ilkido :    "Nln    taga,    ningadanita^^unan 
nindojim  umadatasan !" 

Mldac     alkidot     alkiwanzi :      "  Nongum     guca    animomo1 
kiditan.      Animadcanio"u." 

o 

10        Ningutingixgu    klgito  a4kiwanzi :    "A,   monzon  oglnisawan 

kidocimag."      A'pitci    pa'kada    Nanaboju,    aya'kuzi    gaya. 

Midac    wabamad    ma'rngana8  cingicininit,   a'pitcidabisinlnit. 

Kawln  kago  owabandazin,  kawin  gaya  monzon  owabamasin. 

Mlya'ta  miskwi  koni'kang  owabandan.     Mldac  a'kidot  a'ki- 
15   wanzima'rngan  :    "Uji'toda  kabaciwin  !" 

A,  Nanabuju  ki'timi!  Agawadac  uwldci'a'n  ma'rnganan 
kabacinit  ka'kicidowad  dac  kabaciwin,  mri'mU  pebasigvviwad 
uskinawag  maTnganag.  Mri/>u  ajibicigagowawad  uskina- 
wag ;  tibiskogu  nongum  kipigickijigatag  wlyas,  ml  ajina- 
20  gwa'k  monzowiyas.  Mldac  Nanabqjo  kistciminwandank 
tciwlsinit.  A!  midac  tclba'kwawad.  A!  Nanaboju  kaga't 
tciwlsini. 


Mldac  iman  katawat,  mojagidac  ki'krcrsawag  uskinawag; 
nlbiwa  monzon  unisawan ;  kaya  wawackaciwa6,  anode  gaya 
25  awanslyan  onisawan.  Kawl'ka  pa'kadasi  Nanaboju;  monjag 
wanicicininig  wlyas  umltcim.  Niguding  idac  kru'sigana 
pacig  uskinawa  maTngan,  midac  pimida  nlbiwa  ki'O*ci4tod. 
Mldac  kaga't  Nanaboju  kiminwandank  nlbiwa  pimida  wa- 


Nanabushu!  as  you  go  along-,  pick  up  what  your  nephew 
has  killed." 

And  then  said  Nanabushu:  "What  have  I  to  do  with 
clog-dung  ?" 

Thereupon  the  old  (Wolf)  picked  it  up.  And  then  he 
shook  it,  whereupon  the  flesh  of  slain  game  he  obtained 
from  it.  And  when  Nanabushu  saw  the  flesh  of  slain 
game,  he  said:  "I  say,  do  let  me  carry  along  the  game 
killed  by  my  nephew!" 

Whereupon  said  the  old  man:  "Only  a  moment  ago 
you  called  it  dog-dung.  Keep  on  going." 

Now,  by  and  by,  (as  they  went  along,)  said  the  old  (Wolf) : 
"Ah!  a  moose  have  your  nephews  killed."  Very  hungry 
was  Nanabushu,  and  he  was  tired.  And  when  he  saw 
the  Wolves  as  they  were  lying  down,  very  full  were  they 
from  eating.  Nothing  he  saw,  and  no  moose  he  saw  •, 
only  the  blood  on  the  snow  he  saw.  Thereupon  said  the 
old  Wolf:  "Let  us  make  a  camp!" 

Oh,  but  Nanabushu  was  lazy !  Much  against  his  will 
he  helped  the  Wolves  make  the  camp.  After  they  had 
finished  the  camp,  then  up  rose  all  the  young  Wolves. 
Thereupon  then  vomited  the  youths ;  exactly  like  meat 
that  has  newly  been  cut  up,  such  was  the  appearance  of 
the  moose-meat.  Whereupon  Nanabushu  was  greatly 
delighted  with  the  thought  of  eating.  Ha !  and  then  they 
started  cooking.  Ha,  but  Nanabushu  truly  ate  a  great  deal! 

Now,  there  in  that  place  they  made  their  home,  and 
often  on  a  hunt  went  the  youths ;  many  moose  they  killed  ; 
and  deer  and  various  kinds  of  game  they  slew.  Never 
was  Nanabushu  hungry ;  often  meat  that  was  nice  he  had 
for  his  food.  Now,  once  a  young  Wolf  was  breaking  up 
some  bones  (to  boil  them  for  the  marrow),  and  so  grease 
in  great  quantity  he  made.  Thereupon  truly  Nanabushu 
was  pleased  at  seeing  so  much  grease.  Now,  another  time 

25 — PUBL.    AMER.    ETIIN.    SOC.    VOL.    VII. 


bandank.  Mlnawa  dec  ninguding  pajig  uskinawa  wi'irsi- 
gana.  Mldac  a'kidot :  "Kawln  awiya  ningakanawabami- 
gusi,  kawicimuyu'k." 

Panimagu,    ka'tibi'katinik    mldac  a'kidot  a'kiwanzimaTn- 
5   gan  :    "Kagu,   Nanabuju,  kanawabama'kyan  wa'u'siganat." 

Medac  ki'kawicimowad,  medac  a'ta  arwe  uskinawe  ma'l'n- 
gan  namadabit  usiganat.  Mlidac  Nanabuju  klmotc  ajika- 
nawabamad,  miidac  wabamad  andodaminit  cacagwandan^ 

•  •  •  o        *  •      o 

u'kanan,  miidac  pimida  wantcitciwaninig  udoning  unaganing 
10  idac     udanra-'ton.       Magwadac     kanawabamad     Nanabuju 
andodaminit,   mli  ajiko'tigwandang  ubi'kwa'kukanan  medac 
Nanabuju    uskpjigung   may  a  glbangsininig.      Medac  Nana 
buju    kra/'pisigagwat    iwe    u'kan.      Alkiwanzidac   ma'rngan 
uglpapodanan     Nanabojon,     mldac     klbimadisit.       Mri'dac 
i  5   anat :    "  Magica  kigi'kanawabama." 


Medac  a'kidot  Nanabojo :  "Kawin  ningi'kanawabamasi, 
undcidagu  nimba'kinda-u'k." 

Me'i'dac  mlnawa  ninguding  nl'biwa  ayawad  u'kanan, 
mli  a'kidot  a'kiwa^ima'rngan :  "Tagana,  klni'tam,  Nana- 
20  bujo,  usiganan." 

Medac  kaga't  Nanabogo  a'kidot  "  'A7  wixsa  ninga'O'si- 
gana."  Nanabuju  dac  uglmi'kwandan  ka'todakud,  kaga 
klnisigut.  Medac  a'kidot  Nanabujo :  uKawicimoyuk.  Kagu 
awiya  ningakanawabamigusi.  Padagwingwacinuk." 


25        Medac  gaga't  ka'totamowad. 

Medac  Nanabojo  mamadowandang  u'kanan,  a'kiwanzidac 
ma-rngan  udu'O'ndci  kanawabaman  Nanabucon  andoda 
minit;  miidac  Nanaboju  aji'o'da'pinang  kitci'o-'kan,  medac 
ajipa'ki'tawad  uskinawe  maTnganan,  mi  ajinisat.  Medac 


one  of  the  youths  wanted  to  break  up  some  bones  (to 
boil  for  the  marrow).  And  so  he  said:  "By  no  one  do 
I  wish  to  be  seen,  go  you  to  bed." 

After  a  while,  when  night  came  on,  then  said  the  old 
Wolf:  " Don't,  Nanabushu,  (don't)  watch  him  who  is  to 
crack  bones  (and  boil  them  for  the  marrow)!" 

Thereupon  they  went  to  bed,  except  only  the  young 
Wolf  that  was  seated  breaking  the  bones  (to  boil  them  for 
the  marrow).  Now,  when  Nanabushu  secretly  took  a  look 
at  him,  he  then  saw  that  what  he  did  was  to  gnaw  upon 
the  bones,  and  that  the  grease  which  came  from  his  mouth 
he  kept  putting  into  a  vessel.  Now,  while  Nanabushu  was 
watching  what  he  was  doing,  (the  Wolf)  then  let  slip  from 
his  mouth  a  joint-bone  with  a  knob,  whereupon  it  fell 
square  on  Nanabushu's  eye.  And  then  Nanabushu  was 
knocked  out  of  his  wits  by  the  falling  bone.  Now,  the 
old  Wolf  breathed  upon  Nanabushu,  whereupon  he  revived. 
And  then  he  said  to  him  :  "Perhaps  you  were  watching  him." 

Thereupon  said  Nanabushu:  "I  was  not  watching  him, 
on  purpose  he  hit  me." 

And  now  another  time,  when  they  had  many  bones,  then 
said  the  old  Wolf:  "Come,  now,  (it  is)  your  turn,  Nana 
bushu,  to  crack  the  bones  (for  the  marrow)." 

Upon  which  truly  Nanabushu  said:  "All  right,  I  will 
crack  the  bones  (for  the  marrow)."  Now,  Nanabushu 
remembered  what  had  been  done  to  him,  that  he  had 
been  nearly  killed.  Therefore  said  Nanabushu:  "Go  you 
to  bed.  By  nobody  let  me  be  watched.  Cover  up  your 
faces." 

And  so  truly  that  was  what  they  did. 

Now,  while  Nanabushu  was  making  a  noise  cracking  the 
bones,  the  old  Wolf  then  slyly  took  a  peep  at  Nanabushu 
(to  see  him)  at  his  work ;  and  now  Nanabushu  took  up 
a  large  bone,  and  then  hit  a  young  W7olf,  whereupon  he 


388 

aji'crniskawat    ka/lkina.     A'kiwanzi    dac    i'kido :    "Amc  win 
pa'ki'tawat?" 

"Kawln  run  pa'kitawasl,"  i'kido  Nanabujo. 
"Kaga't  kipagi'tawa,  kiglganawabamin  kuca." 
5        "Kawin,"    i'kido    Nanabuju.      "Kanabatc    klmotc1    ningl- 
kanawabamigoban,    meidac  ki'kutigwandaman  i  we  pigwa- 
'kugan." 

"Kaga't    kiglpa'ki'tawa    kuca."      Miidac    a'kiwa^zima'rn- 
gan   kibabodanat  ugwisan,   mlidac  kfpimadci'at,   ki'pimadi- 
10  sinit  ogwisan. 

Ninguding  idaxc  a'kiwanzi  oganonan  Nanabojon  :   "Mlsa- 

jigwa    tciguslyang.      Pecig    kigamlnin  kidocim,   ml  au  kaya 

gin    kawldclwad    dcinandawandcigat.      Pajig    kaya  ningawi- 

dclwa.      Kigamlnin    iskuda."      Medac    ajipogidid    a'kiwanzi. 

15    "Mi    awa    a'pis."      Mlnawa    klpogidi    a'kiwanzi.      "Ml  awe 

saga'tagan."    Mlnawa  glpogidi.    "Mri'we  krrman."   Mlnawa 

glpogidi.     "Ml  awe  wigwas.1    Panimagu,  krkapaciyan  kra-- 

'toyan    misan,    ml    iu    kadicipajidcigwaskuniyan  iman  misan 

a'tag,   ml  iu  kadici  piskanasag  ickoda.      Kagu  win  anicagu 

20  kudcito'kyan." 


45.  THE  DEATH  OF  NANABUSHU'S  NEPHEW. 3 

Mri'dac  ajimadcawad ;  papa'kan  ijawad  a'klng.  Nlgani- 
wanidac  odojiman,  wlnidac  Nanabojo  udanang  pimosa. 
Tcibwa'O'di'tang  idac  wrkabaciwad,  Nanabuju  kri'nandam  : 
"Taga  ningagudcilton  iskuda,"  mlidac,  ka/i'ciuji'tdd  misan 
25  a'ki'kang,  me'rdac  ajipacidcikwaskunit,  meidac  ka'ijipis- 
kanag  iskuda.  A  !  gaga't  kistciminwandam  Nanabujo. 

1   Used  for  starting  a  rapid  blaze. 


389 

killed  him.  At  that  up  they  all  rose  from  where  they  lay. 
And  the  old  (Wolf)  said:  "Why  did  you  hit  him?" 

"I  did  not  hit  him,"  said   Nanabushu. 

"Indeed,  you  did  hit  him,   for  I  was  watching  you." 

"Nay,"  said  Nanabushu.  "Perhaps  secretly  was  I  ob 
served  by  him,  and  that  was  why  from  my  mouth  I  slipped 
my  hold  on  the  knobbed  ankle-bone." 

"Truly,  indeed,  you  did  hit  him."  Now,  when  the  old 
Wolf  breathed  upon  his  son,  he  then  revived  him  •,  alive 
became  his  son. 

Now,  once  the  old  (Wolf)  spoke  to  Nanabushu,  saying: 
"It  is  now  about  time  that  we  should  be  moving.  One 
of  your  nephews  will  I  give  to  you,  and  he  will  be  the 
one  for  you  to  accompany  when  he  goes  to  hunt.  One, 
too,  will  I  accompany.  I  will  give  you  fire."  Thereupon 
the  old  (Wolf)  broke  wind.  "Now,  that  is  a  flint."  Again 
the  old  (Wolf)  broke  wind.  "Now,  that  is  the  punk." 
Again  he  broke  wind.  "That  is  kindling."  Again  he 
broke  wind.  "That  is  birch-bark.1  After  a  while,  when 
you  go  into  camp  (and)  have  gathered  the  fire-wood,  then 
shall  you  leap  over  the  place  where  the  wood  is,  where 
upon  up  will  start  the  blaze.  Do  not  try  to  do  it  merely 
for  the  sake  of  doing  it." 

45.  THE  DEATH  OF  NANABUSHU'S  NEPHEW.3 

Thereupon  they  started  away ;  into  different  lands  they 
went.  Now,  ahead  went  his  nephew,  and  Nanabushu  him 
self  travelled  behind.  And  before  they  arrived  where  they 
were  to  camp,  Nanabushu  thought:  "Now,  I  shall  try  to 
make  a  fire ;"  whereupon,  after  he  had  gathered  the  wood 
together  at  a  place,  he  then  leaped  over  it,  upon  which 
up  blazed  the  fire.  Ah !  verily,  much  pleased  was  Nanabushu. 

2  For  other  versions  see  Nos.   10  (p.   89)  and  31   (p.   251). 


390 

Medac  ka/rjimadcad.  A'prrdac  wadi'tang  ima11  kra'tod 
ubimiwanan  a'we  uskinawe,  mrrman  kmji'tod  gabaciwin  • 
wlnidac  uskinawa  bapanandawandciga.  A^Didac  Nanabuju 
wa^odawad,  ka/u^tod  misan,  ml'i/<u  ajibagitcigwaskonit. 
5  Kaga  anawi  kipiskanan1.  Mmawa  glbajitcigwaskon1,  nawa- 
dcidac  pangi  iskoda  ki'a'yan1.  Mmawa  glpacidcigwaskuni, 
kawm  ganaga  ickuda  oglwabandazln.  Pinic  kftibi^kadin1. 
A'pi'i'dac  padagwicing  uskinawa,  onondan  tcitcing  waga- 
mingisaning ;  mmangwana'a11  Nanaboju  pacidci  kwaskwas- 
10  konit.  Mldac  a^kidot  uskinawa.  "Anln,  Nanabuju,  acitci- 
gayan?  M^gica  kiglbabotawa." 


"Kawin,"  i'kido  Nanaboju. 

Mldac     win     uskinawa     ka/rcibacidcigwaskonit,     medac 
skuda  klbiskanag. 
15        A'pitci  gaya  krkatclban   Nanabuju. 

Mldac  anat :    "Kagu  mlnawa  wi'ka  iu  todangan,  panima 
ogu  kfkabaciyan  ml  kadodaman." 

Medac  kaga't  ka'todang  Nanaboju.      Panima  ogu  ka*a'- 
'todin  misan  mri'u  ajibajitcigwaskonit,   medac  skuda  piska- 
20  nanig.      Monjagidac  klbabamadisiwag,   monjag  kaya  awasi 
yan  onisan  awa  uskinawa ;  a'pitci  monjag  minowlsini  Nana 
buju.      A'pitci  osagra/n   udojiman. 


Ningudingidac  Nanabuju  krrnabandam  odojiman  ki'pa- 
'kobisanid  slbing.  Mlidac  anat  odojiman:  "Taga,  ayam- 
25  gwamisin  klcpin  no'pinanat  a'wasi.  Klcpin  dac  sirbi  waban- 
daman,  manu  mi'tig  ani-a^pagiton,  mldac  iman  tc^ani 
ta'ku'klyan  ;  misav^agu  a'pitci  agansing  slblns,  manu  mi'tig 
anra^pagi^ton,  medac  Iman  tci'a'nita'ku'klyan,  misawagu 
a/nica  pasagamiga'k.  Kagu  wanandagan  iu  aninan." 


Thereupon  they  set  out.  And  when  he  arrived  at  the 
place  where  the  youth  had  put  down  his  pack,  then  there 
he  made  the  camp ;  for  the  youth  himself  was  away  on  a 
hunt  for  game.  Now,  when  Nanabushu  desired  to  make 
the  fire,  he  put  on  the  wood ;  and  so  again  he  leaped 
over  it.  For  all  that,  it  barely  caught  fire.  Once  again 
he  leaped  over  it,  and  even  less  was  the  fire  there.  Again 
he  leaped  over,  and  no  fire  at  all  did  he  see.  At  last 
night  came  on.  Now,  when  back  came  the  youth,  he  heard 
the  sound  of  somebody  thumping  on  the  ground ;  it  turned 
out  to  be  Nanabushu  leaping  over  and  over.  Whereupon 
said  the  youth:  "What,  Nanabushu,  are  you  doing?  Per 
haps  you  have  been  kindling  fires  (without  any  reason)." 

"No,"  said   Nanabushu. 

And  so,  after  the  youth  himself  had  leaped  over,  then 
the  fire  blazed  up. 

And  very  cold  was  Nanabushu  at  the  time. 

And  then  he  said  to  him:  "Don't  ever  do  it  again,  not 
till  you  go  into  camp,  then  may  you  do  it." 

And  so  truly  that  was  what  Nanabushu  did.  Not  till 
he  had  put  on  the  wood  did  he  then  leap  over,  where 
upon  the  fire  blazed  up.  Now,  continually  were  they 
travelling  about,  and  often  did  the  youth  slay  the  game ; 
ever  so  frequently  Nanabushu  had  good  food  to  eat. 
Very  fond  was  he  of  his  nephew. 

Now,  once  Nanabushu  had  a  dream  that  his  nephew  fell 
into  a  river.  Whereupon  he  then  said  to  his  nephew:  "I 
wish  that  you  would  be  careful  when  you  are  following 
after  game.  And  when  you  see  a  river,  just  fling  a  stick 
ahead  of  you,  for  that  is  where  you  shall  step ;  even 
though  it  be  a  very  small  brook,  do  throw  a  stick  ahead 
of  you,  and  there  you  shall  step,  even  though  there  be 
only  the  dry  bed  of  a  stream.  Don't  ever  forget  what  I 
am  telling  you." 


392 

Kinwanjidac  babamadisiwad.  Ninguding  kawin  kitagwi- 
ciziwan  odojiman.  Me'rdac  anandang  Nanabuju:  "Mlsa 
ganabatc  ka'rnabandamamban." 

Windac    uskinawa    no'pinanat  awasiyan.      Kaga  a/dimat 
5   mri/>u  wabandang  pasa'kamiganig.     Axnawi  uglmi'kwandan 
ka'i'gi^pan  omicomayan,   mldac  iman  krpa^kublsad  ki'tcizl- 
bing  •   kra'yani  iman. 

Windac  Nanabuju  wayabamnig  kimadca  nandawabamad 
odojiman.  Mldac  klmi'kang  kitcizlbi,  meya'pana  odojiman 

10  kiwani'a't.  Medac  glki'tcimawi,  medac  ka'i'jimadcat  nisa- 
dciwan.  Ninguding  idac  animadablt  zlbing,  a'pitci  wlmini- 
lkwe ;  miidac  ajicingicing  wlmini'kwat,  mldac  wabandang 
mlnan  anamindim,  mldac  wa/ijro'da'pinang,  kawindac 
uml'kunazinan.'  Kinwanj  anugidotam  wlmamot.  Kagabl 

15  dac  oma  inabit  icpiming,  mri'u  wabandang  agodanig  mlnan. 
Minangwana  ini/u  mensinatapigisininig.  A'pldac  kawaban- 
dang,  kri-'kido :  "Mri'we  kadicini'kadag  tcianraptklnwang, 
ambiminan." 


Medac    minawa    gimadcad.      Ninguding,   minawa  anima- 
20  dabld  zlbing,  owabaman  wabimangwan  ogiskimanisln  gaya; 
nibrkang  inabiwag.      Nanabuju  dac  ogagwadciman  :  "Wa- 
gunan  kanawab^ndamak  ?" 

Medac     a'kitowad :     "Manidog    oman    taxwag.       Migiwe 
oda^pinawad  Nanaboju  odojiman.    Mi/(a'we  malnganiwayan 
25   kebiskwanda/o'niwit,   mra'we  kanawabamangit." 


Kagatsa  onickimigon  Nanabuju.    Miidac  ajigagwadcimad : 
"Anlndi  andawad?     Wawani  wlndamawiciyu'k." 


393 

So  for  a  long  time  they  went  travelling  about.  Once 
upon  a  time  his  nephew  did  not  return  home.  Whereupon 
thought  Nanabushu :  "Therefore  my  dream  must  have 
perhaps  come  true." 

But  in  the  mean  while  the  youth  was  in  pursuit  of  some 
game.  Almost  was  he  about  to  overtake  (the  game) 
when  he  saw  the  dry  bed  of  a  stream.  Although  he  was 
mindful  of  what  he  had  been  told  by  his  uncle,  yet  there 
he  fell  into  a  great  river ;  he  remained  there. 

Now,  Nanabushu  himself  on  the  morrow  set  out  to  look 
for  his  nephew ;  and  when  he  found  a  great  river,  then 
at  once  he  lost  (track  of)  his  nephew.  Hereupon  he 
greatly  wept,  and  then  he  started  off  down  the  stream. 
Once  as  he  went  down  to  the  river,  very  anxious  was  he 
to  drink ;  and  so,  as  he  lay  down  to  drink,  then  he  beheld 
some  berries  under  the  water,  whereupon  he  wanted  to 
get  them,  but  he  could  not  get  hold  of  them.  For  a 
long  while  he  tried  in  vain  to  get  them.  Finally,  as  up 
this  way  he  looked,  there  he  beheld  the  berries  hanging. 
They  were  the  things  that  cast  the  reflection  (in  the  water). 
And  when  he  saw  it,  he  said:  "This  is  what  they  shall 
be  called  till  the  end  of  the  world,  high-bush  cranberries." ] 

Thereupon  he  continued  his  way.  Another  time,  when 
he  came  down  to  the  river,  he  saw  a  White  Loon  and  a 
Kingfisher ;  in  the  water  they  were  looking.  Nanabushu 
then  asked  of  them:  "What  are  you  watching  for?" 

Thereupon  they  said :  "  Manitous  dwell  in  this  place. 
It  is  they  who  took  Nanabushu's  nephew.  Now,  the  skin 
of  that  Wolf,  which  they  use  for  a  flap  over  the  doorway, 
is  the  thing  for  which  we  were  watching." 

Truly,  indeed,  was  Nanabushu  angered.  Thereupon  he 
inquired  of  them:  "Where  do  they  live?  Rightly  declare 
it  to  me." 

1  This  episode  does  not  properly  belong  at  this  point. 


394 

Medac  a'kidowad :  "Ml  oma  andawad  Igi/u  manidog 
ka'o'da'pinawad  gidojiman." 

"Wawani  dibadcimoyu'k."  Medac  ka/ijra'ndomad  ogis- 
kimanisln.  Mldac  Nanabuju  ka'i*ji*o*jibra'd  ogiskimanisln 
5  kaya  mangwan. 

A!  gaga/t  minwandamog.  Mldac  a'kidowad :  "Klcpin 
kistciglca'tag,  ka/lkina  tamo'klwag.  Mro'malku  nibawad 
oman  minising." 

Pa'kic  kaya  nickadisi  Nanabuju.  Mldac  pagidinad,  kaga 
10  oglnisan  ogiskimanisln;  mrrdac  wlnawadinad  oglpicigupinan. 
Mri'dac  ka/rcimadcad  Nanabuju  no'piming.  Ogi*a'wi*o  ji'a*n 
mi'tigwabm  kaya  asawanan.  Medac  a'kidot  Nanabuju : 
"Taga  tawikiltcikijalta  wabang."  Medac  kaga't  kistcimija- 
'kwad  wayabang.  Medac  Nanabuju  ka'ijrrjad  iman  tibicko 
15  minising,  mldac  iman  tcigibig  klmbawit.  "Mi'tigong  nln- 
gadijinagus,"  a'pitci  kasongag  klckana'kad."  Mri'dac  iman 
kra'sad  omi'tigwabm  iman  oni'kang.  A'pldac  kizis  pamo- 
'kang,  a'pitci  gljalta.  Kagadac  nayawa'kwag  ml  cigwa 
mo'kiwad  manidog. 


20        Medac      a'kidowad      manidog:      "Kiwabandanawamban 
Ini'-u^k11  klnawa  iwe  klckana'kad?" 
"Kawln,"  i'kidowag  anint. 
Anintidac    i'kidowag :    "Anye8,    nlwabandanaban  nlni'k11." 

Anint  i'kidowag :   "Nasana'ku   Nanabuju  ta'i'jinaguz1 !" 

25        Anode    manidog  mo'klwag.      Mrrdac  anawad   Wabima- 
lkwan :    "Taga,  awigagwadclwadan  Twe  kiskana'kad." 

Medac  kaga't  ka-rjrijad  wabima'kwa  •,  medac  kigagwa- 
dcibidot,  kawin  kanaga  oglkawibidosin.  Medac  a/kidot 
Wabima'kwa  :  "An,  kawin  Nanabuju  awisi ;  mi'tig  i'i'we!" 


395 

Whereupon  they  said:  "This  is  the  place  where  dwell 
the  manitous  who  seized  your  nephew." 

"Be  sure  to  relate  it  truthfully."  And  then  he  asked 
the  Kingfisher  to  come.  Thereupon  Nanabushu  painted 
the  Kingfisher  and  the  Loon. 

Ah!  truly  were  they  pleased.  Thereupon  they  said: 
"If  it  becomes  very  hot,  then  will  all  come  forth.  It  is 
upon  this  island  that  they  usually  sleep." 

And  all  the  while  was  Nanabushu  angry.  And  when 
he  let  them  go,  he  nearly  killed  the  Kingfisher ;  for  as  he 
was  going  to  seize  him,  he  missed  catching  him.  There 
upon  off  started  Nanabushu  into  the  forest ;  he  went  to 
make  a  bow  and  some  arrows.  And  then  said  Nanabushu : 
"I  will  that  it  be  very  warm  to-morrow."  And  so  truly 
there  was  a  very  clear  sky  on  the  morrow.  Thereupon 
Nanabushu  went  over  to  a  place  opposite  the  island,  and 
there  on  the  bank  of  the  river  he  stood.  "Like  a  tree 
will  I  look,  (like)  a  stump  that  is  exceedingly  strong." 
And  so  there  upon  his  arm  he  put  his  bow.  And  when 
the  sun  was  rising,  it  grew  very  warm.  And  when  it  was 
nearly  noon,  then  out  began  coming  the  manitous. 

And  then  said  the  manitous:  "Did  you  yourselves  ever 
see  that  stump  before?" 

"No,"  said  some  of  them. 

But  some  of  them  said:  "Yes,  we  ourselves  are  accus 
tomed  to  seeing  it." 

Some  of  them  said :  "  Woe  to  us  should  Nanabushu  take 
on  such  a  form!" 

All  sorts  of  manitous  came  forth.  And  now  they  said 
to  the  White  Bear.:  "I  wish  you  would  go  wrestle  with 
that  stump." 

Thereupon  truly  thither  went  the  White  Bear ;  and  he  tried 
shaking  it,  but  not  a  whit  did  he  move  it.  Thereupon  said 
the  W7hite  Bear:  "Why,  it  is  not  Nanabushu;  it  is  wood!" 


396 
'A!   kayabi  anint  uoa^tanawan.      Kaya  win  Nigik  kimo- 

J  O  J  O 

ckamu.  Medac  a'kidot:  "Ha,  ha,  ha,  ha!"  a'pa'pid,  "kawPka 
nm  ningiwabandazln." 

Midac  minawa  a'kidowad :  "Skoma",  km,  Miciginabik, 
5  awigutci'ton !" 

Medac  kaga't  krijat.  Medac  ka'ijitatiba'kuwad  ulkwa- 
ganang.  Me'i'dac  ka/rjibapasi'tad  kinabi'k. 

An,  nlbiwa  kra'nimadca  kizis. 

Kagagu  tciwa'kwanamut  Nanabuju  mri/>u  ka/i'cipagidci- 
10  tanit  miciginabigon. 

Medac  a'kidot  ginabik  :  u  'A,  kawin  a11  Nanabuju  awisi ; 
mi'tig  i'i'we!" 

Mri'dac  ka'i'jipomawad.  Ickwadac  kimo'klwag  ninj  ma- 
nidog,  ml  igiwe  ogimag.  Mi'i'dac  ka'ijinibawad  klja'tanig. 

15  Medac  Nanabuju  ka'ijinasi'kawad  omi'tigwabm,  wl'a'wi- 
bimwad.  Nln  jiwanidac  miskwadasiwan,  ml'i'dac  wa/rjidi- 
batcimowad.  Midac  anad  Nanabucu :  "Ic,  tci  tci  tci!  Kagu 
tabatcimu'kao'un !  Mackut  klo-awawaciininim."  Me'i'dac 

o  o  • 

Nanabuju  ka'i'ji'O'da'pinad,   mri'dac  ojibiwad. 

20        An !   kitciminwandamog. 

Midac  anad:    "Miskwadasi  klo-adio^om  tcra'ni'a'tklwanor." 

•  D  •          O  •  O 

Midac  agud  miskwadasiwan  :  "  Kagu  kwaya'k  pimwa'kan  ; 
agawatacinuwad  ijipimw1." 


Midac  Nanabuju  ka'ijinasi'kawad  mi/u  manidon.    Acpldac 

25   ka'U'disad,   mri''"  ajipimwad,  kwaya'kigu  wiyawing,  kawin- 

dac  uglmijwasin.     Minawadac  pajig  odasawan  uglnabisidon, 

mlidec     ka'ijipimwad     agawatacininit,     mri'dac    klmljwad. 

Minawadac  wawlp  pajig  oglpimwan,  Ini/u  ugiman. 


397 

Ah !  but  yet  some  of  them  feared  it.  And  the  Otter 
too  came  forth.  Wh'ereupon  he  said:  "Ha,  ha,  ha,  ha!"  as 
he  began  laughing,  "never  before  have  I  seen  it." 

And  then  again  they  said:  "Let  us  see  you,  Big  Serpent, 
go  try  it!" 

Whereupon  truly  thither  he  went.  Whereupon  he  twined 
round  (Nanabushu's)  neck.  And  then  tight  coiled  the 
Serpent. 

WTell,  far  on  its  way  had  gone  the  sun. 

When  almost  out  of  breath  was  Nanabushu,  then  was 
he  let  go  by  the  Big  Serpent. 

Thereupon  said  the  Serpent:  "Why,  that  is  not  Nana 
bushu  ;  it  is  wood !" 

Whereupon  they  felt  at  ease.  And  then  at  the  last 
out  came  two  manitous ;  they  were  the  chiefs.  Thereupon 
they  went  to  sleep  where  it  was  warm. 

Accordingly  Nanabushu  went  after  his  bow  and  arrows, 
that  he  might  go  shoot  them.  Now,  there  were  two  red- 
burned  (Turtles),  and  now  they  were  going  to  tell.  Where 
upon  to  them  said  Nanabushu  :  "  Hush,  hush  !  Don't  you 
tell!  In  return  I  will  adorn  you  in  gay  color."  Accordingly 
Nanabushu  took  them  up,  and  then  painted  them. 

Ah !  they  were  greatly  pleased. 

Thereupon  he  said  to  them  :  "  Red-burned  creatures  you 
will  be  called  till  the  end  of  the  world." 

WThereupon  he  was  told  by  the  red-burned  (Turtles): 
"  Do  not  shoot  straight  at  them  ;  where  they  cast  a  shadow 
is  the  place  to  shoot  at  them." 

And  so  Nanabushu  went  to  where  the  manitous  were. 
And  when  he  got  to  where  they  were,  then  he  shot  at 
them,  right  at  their  bodies,  but  he  did  not  hit  them. 
Now,  another  arrow  he  fixed  upon  his  bow,  whereupon  he 
shot  at  the  shadows  they  cast,  and  then  he  hit  them. 
And  so  quickly  at  another  he  shot,  at  the  chief. 


Mri'dac  ci'gwa  ki'kanimind  Nanabuju.  "Aaa,  Nanabuju 
unisan  ugiman !" 

Medac    Nanabuju    ka'i'jimadciba'rwad.      A !   medac   nibi 

no'pinanigut.       Ninguding     idac    cigwa    kaga    udadimigun 

z   nibi,  medac  wabamad  a'ka^widclciwan  namadabinid.   Medac 

\j  •  •  o  •  •        •  * 

anad :    "A,   niclma11,   manido  nimamldawiik !" 

"Wa/ce,  amndi  andanadcimat  awe  manido?  Taga,  oman 
plndigan  mwajing!" 

46.    NANABUSIIU  SLAYS  TOAD- WOMAN,  THE  HEALER 
OF  THE  MANITOUS.1 

Mri'dac     Nanabuju     ka/rjipindigad     aka'kwidclciwajino-. 

10  A'pldac  ka'plndigad  Nanabuju  kaya  win,  aka'kwidclci  krpln- 

diga,    mlidac    ka'i'jikiba'a'ng  uwac.      Panima'i'dec  ka'pimi- 

dciwaninig  nipi,  mlnawa  glsaga*a*m  Nanabuju.      Ningudin- 

gidac  ajipimosad,   onondawan  awiya  nagamonit : 

"A'ki  ya'kwagwagiye  nimbicina'U'cin." 

15  Midac  ka'ijinasi'tawad,  mldac  klwabamad  mindimoyayan, 
omaka'kln  ;  wlgubln  obimondanan,  kayadac  jiclgwanan  oja- 
gwansonan  'a8au  mindimoyan.  Nanaboju-o'dec  ogagwadci- 
man  !ni/u  mindimoya'a'n :  "Anln,  no'kimis,  wa'todaman 
Ini/u  wlgubln  ?" 


20  Midac  a'kidot  mindimoyan  :  "Nanabuju  kuca  ogl'pimwa0 
manido8,  nmidac  nlnanandawi'a'g  Igi/u  manidog.  Nana- 
buju'u'dac  winandawapini'kana  onowa  wlgubln ;  miziwa 
a'klng  wri'nablginigadawan.  Klcpin  dec  toto'kablgiskang, 
mri*we  tcigi'kanimint  anlndi  ayad  Nanabuju.  Kawinagin 

25    Nanabuju  kidawisi?" 

1   For  other  versions  see  Nos.   18  (p.   145)  and  32  (p.   261). 


399 

Now,  then  was  the  time  they  knew  it  was  Nanabushu. 
"Oh,  Nanabushu  is  killing  the  chief!" 

Accordingly  Nanabushu  started  to  flee.  Ah !  and  then 
by  the  Water  was  he  pursued.  Now  once,  when  nearly 
overtaken  by  the  Water,  he  then  saw  a  Woodchuck  sitting 
up.  Whereupon  he  said  to  him:  "Alas!  my  little  brother, 
by  a  manitou  am  I  pursued." 

"Well,  where  is  the  manitou  about  whom  you  are  talking? 
Pray,  come  into  this  little  hole  of  mine  !". 

46.   NANABUSHU  SLAYS  TOAD-WOMAN,  THE  HEALER 
OF  THE  MANITOUS.1 

So  Nanabushu  came  into  the  Woodchuck's  hole.2  So 
after  Nanabushu  had  gone  inside,  then  the  Woodchuck 
went  in  too,  whereupon  he  closed  (the  entrance  of)  his 
hole.  And  not  till  the  water  had  flowed  past,  then  again 
out  went  Nanabushu.  Now  once,  as  he  went  walking 
along,  he  heard  somebody  singing : 

"From  the  ends  of  the  world  do  I  come  with  the  sound  of  my  rattles." 

After  that  he  sought,  listening  for  (the  singer),  where 
upon  he  saw  an  old  woman,  a  toad ;  some  linden-bark 
she  carried  upon  her  back,  and  rattles  too  were  hanging 
from  the  old  woman's  girdle.  Thereupon  Nanabushu 
inquired  of  the  old  woman:  "What,  my  grandmother,  do 
you  intend  doing  with  that  linden-bark?" 

Whereupon  said  the  old  woman:  "Why,  Nanabushu 
indeed  has  shot  the  manitous,  and  I  am  going  to  heal  the 
manitous.  And  for  Nanabushu  will  be  set  a  snare  (made) 
from  this  linden-bark ;  all  over  the  earth  will  twine  be  laid. 
And  if  it  pulls  when  he  steps  into  it,  then  will  it  be  known 
where  Nanabushu  is.  Are  you  not  yourself  Nanabushu?" 

*  Translated  by  the  editor. 


4-OO 

"  Kawln, "    i'kido    Nanabuju.      "Kldabimadcrrkina   Nana- 
bujti  wabamad?"      Mldac  anad:    "Anindi  ayayan  ?" 

aMrrman    pacu    ugimag    ayawad.      Nongum    unangucik 
mri'-we  kaga't  wlkitcinanandawiiwayan,   mri'-we  Nanabuju 
5   odojiman   usagm  kadacimigoyan  nongurn  unagucik." 

Mldac  anad  Nanabuju.    "  Anmi'ku  ana'a-man  nagamoyan?" 

Midec  mindimoya  kidibadcimut :  "Mlsa'ku  iu  ana'a-man 
nagamoyan  : 

"  'A'ki  ya'kwagiye  nimbicina'U'cin.'  " 

10  A'pri'dac  ka/lkina  kawindamagut  mri'-*  ka'ijinisat. 
Mri'dac  ka'ijipa'kunat  me'i'dec  ka'i'i'jipizi'kawad,  me-i'dac 
kro'da'pinang  wlgobm  klpimondang ;  kaya  dac  jlcigwanan 
ugljagwasonan.  Me'i'dac  klmadcad  ajani'pan  mindimoya- 
yan.  Kayawlndac  kl'a'ninagamo : 

15  "A'ki  yagwagiye  nimbicina'O'cin." 

A'pri'dac  tagwacing  andanint  ugima8,  mri' wabamad 
udojiman  owayanini  kibiskwanda  Iganiwinint.  Nanabuju 
owabaman  tcitcipiskanit.  Medac  a'kidot :  "  Niya !  nojis, 
ijiwijiyu'k  andanapiyan  ?" 


20  Kaga't  idac  ogri'jiwinigon  iman  andanabipan  mindomo- 
ya'i-ban.  Miidac  wabamad  a'ki'kon  tclba'kwan ;  mriSve 
Nanabuju  udojiman  uzagln  ka'kijidanig.  A'kawa'ku  wisi- 
mban  awe  mindimoyaban.  Mldac  Nanabuju  i'kido :  "Kawln 
ningawlsinisl,  paniman  kri'ckwa'tayan,  ningawlsin."  Me-i'dac 

25   a'kidot    Nanabuju:     "Ka'kina    saga'a'mu'k11,    nlna'ta    uman 


401 

"No,"  said  Nanabushu.  ("Do  you  suppose  that)  you  would 
be  permitted  to  live  if  you  should  see  Nanabushu?"  And 
then  he  said  to  her:  "Where  do  you  abide?" 

"Yonder,  near  by  where  the  chiefs  are.  On  this  evening 
is  truly  when  I  will  do  some  wonderful  healing,  where 
upon  the  upper  arm  of  Nanabushu's  nephew  shall  I  be 
given  to  eat  this  evening." 

So  then  to  her  said  Nanabushu:  "What  is  the  nature 
of  your  song  when  you  sing?" 

WThereupon  the  old  woman  revealed  (it),  saying:  "This 
is  the  way  I  usually  sing  when  I  sing  : 

"'From  the  ends  of  the  world  do  I  come  with  the  sound  of  my  rattles.'" 

Now,  after  he  had  been  told  everything,  then  he  slew 
her.  And  after  he  had  flayed  her  and  put  on  (her  skin), 
he  then  took  up  the  linden-bark  and  put  it  upon  his 
back ;  and  the  rattles  too  were  hanging  at  his  belt.  And 
then  he  went  in  the  same  direction  whither  the  old  woman 
intended  going.  He  too  went  singing  along  the  way  : 

"From  the   ends  of  the  world  do  I  come  with  the  sound  of  my  rattles." 

And  when  he  arrived  at  the  home  of  the  chiefs,  then 
he  beheld  his  nephew's  skin  used  as  a  flap  over  the  entry- 
way.  Nanabushu  beheld  it  move  with  a  quiver.  Where 
upon  he  said:  "Ah,  me!  my  grandson,  will  you  lead  me 
to  the  place  where  I  am  to  sit?" 

Now,  truly  was  he  led  to  the  place  where  the  old  woman 
would  have  sat.  And  then  he  saw  a  kettle  with  food 
cooking  in  it  •,  it  was  the  upper  arm  of  Nanabushu's 
nephew  that  was  cooking.  It  was  usual  for  the  old  woman 
first  to  eat  (before  she  began  with  the  work  of  healing). 
And  so  Nanabushu  said:  "I  am  not  going  to  eat,  not 
till  after  I  have  finished,  then  will  I  eat."  And  this  said 
Nanabushu :  "  All  of  you  go  out  of  doors,  I  only  here 

26 — PUBL.    AMER.    ETHN.    SOC.    VOL.    VII. 


402 

ningataya."  A'plidac  ka''kina  kazaga'a/mowad,  mlima11 
jingicinowad  Igi/u  ugimag,  owabandanan  udasawanan  sasa- 
ga'kwisininig  ima11  ugimanwa8  wlyawining.  Mri'dac  kljaci- 
jigwawad,  mri'dac  kaga't  kinisad.  Mri'dac  klnibowad. 
5  Me-rdac  a'kidot :  "Mlsa  klnibowad  manido." 

Me'i'dac    ajibibagiwad :    "A,    mlsa    klnibowad    manidog ! 

'A'a711,    madcidoyu'k  wlgobm   mi'ziwa  a'king  ta'i-nabigama- 

non ;     mri'dac    tcigi'kanimint    anindi     ayagwan    Nanabuju, 

kicpin  toto'kablgiskang."      Midac  ka/;kina  ka'ijimadcawad, 

10  kl'pimabiginamowad  wlgobm. 

A'pri'dac  ka/lkina  kamadcawad,  Nanabuju  ogipigiskijwan 
klstcitciba'kwa  manidowiyas.  A'pri'dac  ka'klziza'kwad, 
ugra'nduman  abinodclyan,  meidac  gra/camad.  Paji^idac 
abinodciyan  ogiki'kanimigon  Nanabuju  ayawit  talpabiwan. 
15  Midac  anad  :  "Pa'ka,  niclma,  kagu  dibadcimo'kan !"  Me'i'- 
dac  Nanabuju  ka-i-jipa'kwa^'ang  manidopimida,  medac 
ka'ijimlnad  kwlwizansan.  Medac  anad:  "Ka'ka'kijoblzi 
kadicinikasyan  tci'a-ni'a-'klwang." 


Medac  Nanabuju  ka'i  jioda'pinad  manidowayanan  kayadac 
20  odojiman  wayanan,  me'i'dac  ka'ijimadclba'tod,  mini'kidac 
kawabandang  wlgubln  bimabigamunig,  kax'kina  ogl'a*nito- 
'to'kibitonan. 

Medac  a/kidowad  ka/lkina  gabimadisiwa'pan :  "A2^! 
ca'ylgwa  Nanabuju  to'to'kabigiskiga." 

25  Mri'dac  cixgwa  nlbi  klmo'kitciwang,  kayadac  kl'ki'tciki- 
miwan ;  kayadac  Igi/u  asinlg  icpimlng  gro'ndagoMcinog, 
Nanabuju  kl'a'ndoskonind.  Nibiwa  oglnisigowan  asinln 
nlbi  gaya.  Nanabujudec  wadciwing  anagra^pa'i'we.  A'pri'- 


403 

will  remain."  And  after  all  of  them  had  gone  out,  then 
yonder,  where  lay  the  chiefs,  he  beheld  his  arrows  that  were 
sticking  out  from  the  bodies  of  the  chiefs.  Thereupon  he 
shoved  them  in  (farther),  working  them  back  and  forth, 
whereupon  he  truly  killed  them.  So  now  they  were  dead. 
Accordingly  he  said:  "Therefore  now  dead  are  the  manitous." 

And  then  they  cried  aloud:  "Alas!  now  dead  are  the 
manitous.  Now,  then,  take  you  the  linden-bark  (twine) 
everywhere  over  the  earth,  and  string  it  around ;  for  then 
it  will  be  known  where  Nanabushu  is,  should  he  happen 
to  step  into  it  (and  be  caught)."  Thereupon  they  all 
started  away,  laying  the  linden-bark  twine. 

And  when  all  had  started  away,  Nanabushu  cut  (the 
manitous)  into  pieces,  and  made  a  great  cooking  of  the 
manitou-flesh.  And  when  he  had  finished  cooking,  he 
invited  the  children,  and  then  fed  them.  Now,  by  one  of 
the  children  that  was  peeping  in  was  Nanabushu  recog 
nized  to  be  who  he  was.  Thereupon  he  said  to  it:  "Hold 
on,  my  little  brother,  don't  you  tell!"  And  when  Nana 
bushu  sliced  off  some  manitou-grease,  he  then  gave  it  to 
the  small  boy.  Whereupon  he  said  to  him :  "  Fond-of- 
Raw-Fat l  shall  you  be  called  till  the  end  of  the  world." 

Then,  after  Nanabushu  had  taken  up  the  manitou-skins 
and  the  skin  of  his  nephew,  he  then  started  off  running ; 
and,  as  much  of  the  linden-bark  he  saw  stringing  about, 
all  of  it  he  touched  as  he  went  along. 

Thereupon  said  all  who  were  then  living:  "Halloo! 
Nanabushu  is  now  touching  against  the  snare." 

Thereupon  the  water  now  began  to  come  forth,  and  a 
mighty  rain  began  to  pour;  and  also  the  rocks  from  above 
began  to  fall,  to  the  end  that  Nanabushu  be  crushed. 
Many  were  killed  by  the  rocks  and  the  water.  Now, 
Nanabushu  tried  in  vain  to  flee  to  a  mountain.  But  when 

1  A  small  frog. 


404 

dec  wayabandang  mockaninig  ar'ki,  mii/u  klmawandocimad 
mi'tigon  kruji'tod  pmdazagan.  Npjwaswi  a'ta  kl'posiwag 
iman  pindazaganing  a'pi  kani'kiplg  a'ki.  Mldac  Ima11 
kra-yawad  pmdisaganing ;  anindidac  gaya  awaslyan  oglpo- 
5  zi'a'n,  pinajinya8,  anode  gaya  awiya  pabamisatcig.  A'pri'dac 
kinwanj  ayawad  iman  pindazaganing,  ogikanonan  na'tago- 
gmit :  "Gitakaski'tonawana  pangi  a'ki?  Klcpin  pldoyag, 
ninda'uji'ton  a'ki." 

Ni'tarnidac  au  anwanyan  odanagra'nonan  tclgogmit,  ka- 
10  wlndac  ogrta'U'di^tazin  a'ki;  kinondakisabawe.  Usagabini- 
lkarian  Ini/u  wixgup,  mri'gu  ka/lkina  ka'totawad,  clcri'ban 
gaya  mangwan  gaya  ami'kwan.  Medac  kimojskinisat, 
mlnawa  beijik  ciclban,  mangwan,  mlgu  gaya  win  ka'i'ji- 
wabisinit.  Kawin  ogikaski'tosmawa  a'ki.  Mlnawadac 
15  ami'kwan  ogi'a'nonan  tcigoginit,  migogayawin  ka/ijiwabisit; 
kmondanlsabawe.  Ana\vilku  kamonskitcisanitin,  oglwawaba- 
man  a'k1  tcita'kunaminit,  kawlndac  kagon  ogimi'kanzi  a'ki. 
Mlnawadac  wajaskwan  ogra*nonan  tcigoginit.  Mlnawa 
oglsaga'pinan  wlgup. 


20  Midac  kigogit  wajask.  Awaciman  nibiwa  ugiwi'kupidon 
wlgup.  Ningudingigu  udodo'kibidon  iu  saxbab  'asau  wajask, 
mf-i'we  msabawad.  Medac  Nanabuju  ajiwl'kubinad ;  medac 
wawabamacl  wajaskwan,  oglmi'kan  pangi  a'ki  ta'kunaminit 
idawini'k,  pang!  gaya  uda'kwandan,  a'ki,  onlngwiganang 

25  gaya  papangi  a'tani.  Medac  Nanabuju  ka'ijioda'pinang, 
ugipodanan  wajaskwan,  meidec  ki'pimadci-a'd.  Mlgu  kar- 
'kina  iu  ka'todawad.  Mri'dac  ka'ijiba'a'sang  unindcing 


4°5 

he  saw  that  the  earth  was  overflowing-  with  water,  then 
he  gathered  together  some  logs  (and)  made  a  raft.  Seven 
only  embarked  upon  that  raft  when  the  earth  was  flooded 
over  with  water.  And  so  they  remained  there  on  the 
raft ;  some  game-folk,  too,  he  put  aboard,  birds,  and  all 
the  various  creatures  that  fly  about  in  the  air.  And  after 
they  had  been  a  long  while  on  the  raft,  he  spoke  to  them 
that  were  good  at  diving :  "  Can  you  procure  a  little  earth  ? 
If  you  fetch  it  to  me  I  would  create  an  earth." 

Now,  he  first  employed  the  (?)  (kind  of  duck),  but  (the 
bird)  was  not  able  to  come  within  reach  of  the  earth ;  it 
was  drowned  before  it  got  there.  He  had  it  tied  with 
linden-bark  twine,  for  that  was  what  he  did  to  them  all, 

-  the  Ducks  and  the  Loon  and  the  Beaver.  And  when 
it  came  floating  up  to  the  surface,  then  another  Duck, 
and  also  the  Loon,  had  the  same  thing  happen  to  them. 
They  were  not  able  to  fetch  any  earth.  And  next  he 
had  the  Beaver  dive ;  but  it  also  met  the  same  fate,  it 
drowned  before  it  reached  the  bottom.  Every  time  that 
one  came  up,  he  looked  to  see  if  it  had  hold  of  any 
earth,  but  nothing  of  earth  he  found.  So  next  he  had 
the  Muskrat  dive ;  also  he  had  it  tied  with  linden-bark 
twine. 

So  then  into  the  water  dived  the  Muskrat.  Much  farther 
down  he  pulled  on  the  linden-bark  cord.  At  last  he  felt 
the  Muskrat  pulling  at  the  cord,  and  that  was  when  it 
was  drowning.  Thereupon  Nanabushu  pulled  it  up ; 
and  when  he  examined  the  Muskrat,  he  found  that  it 
was  holding  a  little  earth  in  both  its  paws,  and  a  little 
earth  it  also  had  in  the  mouth,  and  there  was  a  little  in 
each  armpit  too.  Thereupon,  after  Nanabushu  took  the 
Muskrat  up  in  his  hands,  he  breathed  upon  it,  where 
upon  he  revived  it.  Now,  that  was  what  he  had  done  to 
them  all.  Now,  when  Nanabushu  had  dried  the  earth  in 


406 

iwacki  au  Nanabuju,  me'i'dac  ka'ijimamigunang  iu  a'ki. 
Meidec  mmawa  ka/ijra-ndnad  kagagiwan  ningudc1  a'ki 
tcisagibri'nig,  kawmdac  kltagwicinzi  kagagi.  Mlnawadac 
wabimimm  ugrarnonan  ;  miidac  krpldot  wadi'kwanans  'acau 
umlmi.  Medac  Nanabuju  ka'i'jipada'kidot  iman  iu  alki 
ta'kunang,  miidac  ka-rjra-'pagidod  nibl'kang.  Pakic  kri-'ki- 
dot :  "Taga,  minis  oman  tayamagat."  Pa'kickaya  ugipo- 
dadan. 


47.   THE  SCATTERING  OF  THE   ANIMALS  AND  THE 
REGULATION  OF  NATURE. 

Mri'dac    iman    kra-yawad    minising,   Nanabujudec  kl'po- 

10  dadciga  kiwi^aya'I*    minising;   mlidec  askam  krarnimistcag 

alki.    Mlgu  iu  ka'todang  kinwanj.    Kaningudwasugunaga'ki- 

dac  ugi-a'nonan  adi'kwan,   "Skoman  kiwitaskan  'oco/u  a'ki." 


Klmadcadac  adi'k.    A'pitci  ki^a^kiwa^Iyu1  a'pl  dagucing. 


Mlnawadac  maTnganan  ugl-a-nonan,  kayawindac  ma-rn- 

15   gan    a'pitci  kra-'kiwa^iyu1  a'pl  tagucing.     Ini'widac  awan- 

slyan   ka^posi^a^pan  a'pitci  klpa'ta'rnowan,  kaya  winawagu 

anicinabag    aja  kianipa'ta'i'nowag ;   papamisatcig  kaya  pin- 

acPyag.      Nanabujudac  ogiwawman  kadijini'kasowad  awasl- 

yag ;   kayagu  pabamisawad  pinacPyag  uglwawlnan  kadijini- 

20  lkasowad ;  klgonyan  gaya.      Kayadac  klgidowag  kadaciwad 

klzisog     ningobibon,     kayadac     ka-u'ndanirnak    klwi'tagljik 


407 

his  hands,  he  then  rolled  it  into  a  ball.  So  then  next 
he  had  the  Raven  (go  find)  if  the  earth  could  be  seen 
anywhere  out  of  the  water,  but  the  Raven  did  not  return. 
Then  next  the  White  Pigeon  he  employed,  whereupon  a 
tiny  twig  did  the  Pigeon  fetch.  And  after  Nanabushu  had 
stuck  it  into  the  earth  which  he  had  there  in  his  hand, 
he  then  tossed  it  into  the  water.  At  the  same  time  he 
said:  UI  will  that  an  island  come  into  existence  here." 
And  at  the  same  time  he  breathed  upon  it. 

47.  THE  SCATTERING  OF  THE  ANIMALS  AND  THE 
REGULATION  OF  NATURE. 

And  so  they  remained  there  on  the  island,  and  Nana 
bushu  breathed  all  over  the  island ;  and  all  the  while 
larger  grew  the  earth.  Now,  that  was  what  he  was  doing 
for  a  long  while.  And  when  the  sixth  day  was  up,  he 
then  employed  a  caribou.  "I  would  have  you  go  round 
this  earth." 

So  away  started  the  caribou.  It  was  very  old  when  it 
returned. 

Then  next  he  employed  a  wolf,  and  the  wolf  was  also 
very  old  when  it  came  back.  And  then  the  game-folk 
that  he  had  had  on  board  were  becoming  very  numerous, 
and  the  people  too  were  themselves  now  increasing  in 
number ;  and  (the  same  was  likewise  true)  of  the  birds. 
So  Nanabushu  called  the  game-folk  by  the  names  by  which 
they  were  to  be  known ;  and  also  the  birds  that  fly  in  the 
air,  he  named  them  by  what  they  were  to  be  called ;  and 
(it  was)  also  the  same  with  the  fishes.  And  they  also 
decreed  how  many  moons  there  should  be  in  one  year, 
and  also  the  number  of  directions  from  which  the  winds 
would  blow,  that  from  the  vault  of  the  sky  in  eight 
directions  would  the  winds  blow.  So  this  was  what  he 


408 

cwa'tcing    tcru-ndanimak.      Mri'dac  ka'i-'kot:    "Anlc,   mlsa 
ka'kina  krirji'toyan  kanondcipimadisiwad  anicinabeg." 

Medac  iwa'pi  kisiswa/rdiwad  miziwe  a'king.  Ka/ijima- 
dcawad,  kaya  wlndac  Nanabuju  klmadca. 

5        Mlsa  a'kosid. 

48.  NANABUSHU  BREAKS  THE  NECKS  OF  THE  DANCING  GEESE. l 

Ningudingisa/  Nanabuju  anipapimusat  no'pimmg.  Nin- 
guding  umadabln  saga-i'gan,  mldac  iman  wabamat  nibawa 
ni'kac.  A'pidci  omisawanima8  wra'mwat.  Mldac  anad : 
alctax,  niclma-rdug,  ondas,  oman,  pijayu'k !"  Anawidec 

10  krpljawag  ni'kag,  kawin  a'pidci  pacu  plcaslwag.  Minawagu 
oganona8 :  "Nicima'i-dug !  oman  plcayu'k,  ka'o-dclmininim!" 
Ogusigo  pacux  tciblcanit.  Kaga'pl  no'pimlng  krija  Nana 
buju;  mi'tigonsan  ugmasi'kanan.  Mi'i'dac  ka'iji'u-ji'tod 
wigiwamans,  mlnawa  oganonan  ni'kan :  "Amba  oman, 

15  udaminoda,  kanlmimin!"  Kagapl  ogl way aj iman  ni'kansa^ 
Medac  ka'ijipindigawad  wigiwamansing,  mri'dac  ajika- 
nonat  Nanabuju:  "Ka'kina  pasangwabicimuyu'k."  Mldac 
ajinagamut : 


"Piisangwabicimowinan  nimbidomm. 

2O  Pasnngvvabicimowinan  nimbldonan. 

Pasangwabicimowinan  nimbldonan. 
Pasangwabicimowinan  nirabidonan." 

Mlclac    kacga't    ajipasangwabiwad    nlmiwad.      A'pri'dac 

ka'kina    pasangwabiwad,    ogitabibinan   nilkan :   mldac  klpo- 

25    'kugwabinad.     Nijidac  nasad,  ugiki'kanimigon ;  mrrdac  aji- 

pibagiwad  :    aA8eXi,   Nanabuju  kinisigunan  !"      Mldac  ka-iji- 

sagidcisawad  wigiwamansing.      Nlja'ta  kanisat. 

1  For  other  versions  see  Nos.   II   (p.   101)  and  20  (p.   169). 


409 

said:  "So,  therefore,  have  I  now  finished  the  creation  of 
everything  from  which  the  people  will  derive  life." 

And  that  was  the  time  they  scattered  to  all  parts  of 
the  earth.  After  they  were  gone,  then  Nanabushu  himself 
went  away. 

And  this  is  the  end  (of  the  story). 

48.   NANABUSHU  BREAKS  THE  NECKS  OF  THE  DANCING  GEESE. l 

Once  on  a  time  Nanabushu  was  travelling  about  inland. 
By  and  by  he  came  out  upon  a  lake,  and  so  there  he  saw 
numerous  Geese.  Very  keen  was  his  desire  to  eat  them. 
Thereupon  he  said  to  them:  "Look,  my  little  brothers! 
Hither,  come  here!"  And  although  hitherward  came  the 
Geese,  yet  not  so  very  close  did  they  come.  And  again 
he  addressed  them,  saying:  "O  my  little  brothers!  come 
hither,  I  want  to  kiss  you."  They  were  afraid  to  come 
close.  At  last  up  inland  went  Nanabushu ;  some  osiers 
he  went  to  get.  And  when  he  had  put  up  a  small  wigwam, 
again  he  spoke  to  the  Geese,  saying:  "Come  hither,  let  us 
play,  we  will  dance!"  At  last  he  persuaded  the  goslings. 
And  so  when  they  had  gone  inside  of  the  little  wigwam, 
thereupon  to  them  spoke  Nanabushu,  saying:  "All  shut 
your  eyes  when  you  dance."  And  then  he  sang  : 

"A  dance  with  eyes  closed  do  I  bring  (to  you). 
A  dance  with  eyes  closed  do  I  bring  (to  you). 
A  dance  with  eyes  closed  do  I  bring  (to  you). 
A  dance  with  eyes  closed  do  I  bring  (to  you)." 

Thereupon  they  really  closed  their  eyes  when  they  danced. 
And  when  all  had  closed  their  eyes,  he  seized  a  Goose ; 
whereupon  he  broke  her  neck.  And  when  he  had  slain 
two,  he  was  found  out;  upon  which  they  cried  aloud,  "Hey, 
by  Nanabushu  are  we  being  slain !"  And  then  they  flew 
out  of  the  little  wigwam.  Only  two  he  had  killed. 


Mldac  kra-nimadclnat  Iniu  ni'kansan.  Kf  podawa  tclgiblg, 
mldac  iman  wiklciswat  ni'kansa8.  Klnlngwa'a-bwa,  uzidansan 
ogisagisidonan.  Mri'dac  ka/ijikawicimut  wlnibat,  kimitcidi- 
yacin.  Mldac  anat  udiyan  :  "Kicpin  anicinabag  sagawa'O'- 
5  wat,  wmdamawicin."  Kaga  clgwa  nabat  oganonigon  :  "Icta, 
anicinabag  sagawa-a'mog." 


Nanabuju  onickaba'to  inabit,  kawm  awiya  owabamasln. 
Minawa  ki'kawicimo.  Pmic  nlnjing  ogltclcimigon.  Kaga'pl 
klniba  Nanabuju. 

10  Anicinabag  klsagawa'O'wat  owabamawan  awiya  mitcidi- 
yacininit.  "Nacka!  kuxca  awax,  mlmawln  Nanabuju."  Kfkaba 
paejik  Ia8a/u  anicinaba ;  owabandanan  ni'kfwizidan  saga- 
danwangizinunig.  Medac  aji'a*ndawawanga'i'gat,  mldac 
ka'i'ji'O'da'pinad  Ini/u  nilkansan.  Ogiklckijanan  uzidansan ; 

15  ajisininigiban,  ogl'ijisiton  48i/u  mi'tawang.  Mldac  kra*ni- 
madcawad  anicinabag. 


A'pi'i-dac  kwaskuzit  Nanabuju,  owabandanan  keyabi 
a'tanig  uzidansan.  "Mlsa7  clgwa  tciwisiniyan,"  i'kido.  Mri/<u 
aji'O'da'pinang  nilkiwizit,  mi  alta  uzidans  ma'kang  ;  minawa 
20  baejik  ododa'pinan,  minawa  ogimanibidon.  "Tiwae!  mawl- 
ja*rdug  kaminuzuwat  nini'kansumag,"  i'kido.  Mldac  ajian- 
dwa'a*nga'i*gat,  kawln  awiya  ayaslwan  nikansima8.  Mri'adc 
anad  udiyan:  "Magica  anicinabeg  krkimodiwag  nini'kan- 


sima8." 


25        "Kawm,"  udigon. 

"K^ga't,  awiya  kl'kimoti.    Nongum  klgatanimis."    Medac 


4u 

Thereupon  he  carried  the  goslings  away.  He  made  a 
fire  by  the  edge  of  the  water,  and  it  was  there  he  intended 
to  cook  the  goslings.  He  baked  them  in  the  embers,  their 
little  feet  he  left  sticking  out.  And  when  he  lay  down 
to  go  to  sleep,  he  lay  with  his  bottom  exposed.  Thereupon 
he  said  to  his  bottom  :  "If  any  people  come  in  view  round 
the  point,  then  you  notify  me."  When  he  was  nearly 
asleep,  he  was  addressed:  "Ah!  some  people  are  coming 
into  view  round  the  point." 

Nanabushu  leaped  up  from  where  he  lay  to  look,  but 
he  saw  no  one.  Again  he  lay  down  to  sleep.  Even  a 
second  time  he  was  deceived.  Finally  to  sleep  went 
Nanabushu. 

Some  people  paddling  into  view  round  the  point  saw 
some  one  lying  with  his  bottom  exposed.  "Why,  look! 
yonder  is  some  one,  it  must  be  Nanabushu."  Ashore  went 
one  of  the  men ;  he  saw  gosling-legs  sticking  out  of  the 
ashes.  And  so,  when  scratching  among  the  ashes,  he 
thereupon  picked  up  the  goslings.  He  cut  off  their  little 
legs  with  a  knife ;  as  (the  feet)  were  before,  so  back  in 
the  ashes  he  placed  them.  Thereupon  the  people  con 
tinued  on  their  way. 

And  when  from  slumber  awoke  Nanabushu,  he  saw  (that) 
the  little  legs  were  still  there.  "Therefore  now  shall  I  eat," 
he  said.  So  when  he  took  hold  of  a  gosling-leg,  it  was 
a  little  leg  only  that  he  found;  another  he  took  up,  an 
other  he  pulled  out.  "I  declare!  it  must  have  been  long 
since  my  goslings  were  thoroughly  cooked,"  he  said.  There 
upon  he  searched  about  in  the  ashes,  but  there  was  nothing 
of  his  goslings.  And  so  he  said  to  his  bottom:  "Perhaps 
some  people  have  stolen  my  goslings." 

"No,"  he  was  told. 

"To  be  sure,  somebody  has  stolen  (them).  This  moment 
shall  you  be  punished."  Thereupon,  when  he  had  built  up 


ka/i'jikistcipodawad,   mldac  iman  ajidiyanit.      A'prrdac  tca- 
yagisut,   "TcF,  tcF,  tcP !" 

j, 

"E'a>ce,    lTci,    tci,   tcl,'   ka/rnwayan   ka/kimotimigowiyan 
ninikansimag." 

5        Wfkadac  ki-a-nipasigvvl,   ki'a-nimadca  no'pimlng ;  a'pidci 
wlsagandam  udiyan. 


49.   NANABUSHU  AND  THE  LITTLE  FISHERS. 

Ningudingidac  anipabimosad,  ogimi'kawa8  udclgansa^  aya- 
nit.      Mldac  anad :    "Anlndi  glgiwa?" 

"  Pabanandawandciga." 

10  Mri'dac  ka'ijipopo'kutclbinat,  ugimidcina8.  Mldac  kl'a-- 
nimadcad.  A'pri'dac  tagucing  udclg  ugimi'kawa*  unldca- 
nesas  nibunit.  Mldac  ajino'pinariad  Nanabujun.  A'pl'i'dac 
adimint  Nanabuju,  aninagamo  Nanabuju : 


"Udcigansug  ma  kabopo'kudcipinagwa. 
I  5  Udcigansag  ma  kabopo'kudclpinagwa. 

Udcigansag  ma  kabopo'kudclpinagwa. 
Udcigansag  ma  kabopo'kudclpinagwa." 

Udclganidac  oganonigon  :    "Klnmawm,  kigmisag  ninldca- 
nisag!" 

20  "Kawln!"  i'kido  Nanabuju.  A'pri'dac  adimint,  mi'tigunk 
kra^pagizo.1  Udclgidac  ugimlgadan  48i/u  mictik,  a'pidci 
uglplgwandan  8ili/u  mi'tig.  Medac  kaega't  Nanabuju  wlsa- 
gandank  udiyank., 

1  Mi'tigunk  kra-'pagizo,  "he  turned  instantly  into  a  log;"  literally,  "into  or  on  to 
a  "log  he  threw  himself,"   but  the  sense  is  as  given  in   the  translation. 


a  great  fire,  he  accordingly  turned  his  bottom  towards  it. 
Ard  when  he  was  burning,  "Ouch,  ouch,  ouch!"  (his 
bottom)  said. 

:    "Oh,   'Ouch,    ouch,   ouch!'   is  what  you  would  say  after 
have  been   robbed   of  my  goslings." 

Now,  a  long  while  afterwards  he  rose  to  his  feet,  he 
started  off  inland  ;  a  very  severe  pain  he  suffered  at  his 
bottom. 

49.   NANABUSHU  AND  THE  LITTLE  FISHERS. 

And  once,  when  travelling  along,  he  came  upon  some 
young  Fishers.  And  this  he  said  to  them  :  "  Where  is 
your  mother?" 

"She  is  off  somewhere  hunting  for  game." 
And  when  he  had  broken  them  in  two  at  the  wrist,  he 
eased  upon  them.  And  then  on  his  way  he  went.  And 
when  home  was  come  the  Fisher,  she  found  that  her  children 
were  dead.  Thereupon  she  pursued  Nanabushu.  And 
when  Nanabushu  was  overtaken,  he  was  going  along  singing 
a  song : 

"Little  fishers  are  the  ones  that  I  have  broken  in  two  at  the  wrists. 
Little  fishers  are  the  ones  that  I  have  broken  in  two  at  the  wrists. 
Little  fishers  are  the  ones  that  I  have  broken  in  two  at  the  wrists. 
Little  fishers  are  the  ones  that  I  have  broken  in  two  at  the  wrists." 

By  the  Fisher  was  he  addressed:  "Then  it  was  you,  you 
slew  my  children  !" 

"No!"  said  Nanabushu.  And  when  he  was  overtaken, 
he  turned  instantly  into  a  log.1  And  the  Fisher  fought 
the  log,  ever  so  much  did  she  tear  the  log  with  her  teeth. 
Thereupon  truly  did  Nanabushu  suffer  pain  in  his  bottom. 


50.   NANABUSHU  AND  THE  RUFFED  GROUSE. 

Menawa  kra-nimadca  Nanabuju  a'pidci  kagidcidiyat. 
Minawa  pinansa2  umi'kawa8  namadabinit.  "  Anln  ajini'kasud 
kigiwa  ?" 

"Kuckuncrasi." 

o 

5        "Nabisa'a-  kuckungasi !"  i'kido  Nanabuju.      Meclac  ka'i'- 
jimldcinad,   midac  kra'nimadcad. 

A'pl'i'dac  tagucing  kistcipina  owabama8  unldcanisa8  mo- 
wiwinit.      "Awanan  ka'totonag  ?" 
"Nanabuju  ninglmldcinigunan." 

10  Kinickadizi  lasa/u  pina.  Ogmo'pinanan  idac  Nanabujun, 
mganidac  anrrjanit  kl'poni  a  pina.  Klckabilkang  anrijaban 
Nanabuju.  pinadac  ki'kazu  cingubl'kang.  A'pri'dac  iman 
pamusat  Nanabuju,  pina  tcase'ka  klpasigu'u',  anigu'k  gita- 
'tawanga.  A'ta!  mi  a'pana  Nanabuju  ka'ijika'kabi'kisa. 

15  Medac  kltclcabi'kitiyacink.  Kl'i'nabit  iman  kickabi'kank, 
owabandanan  umigln  agu'kanik  iman  asinlng.  "Wa'kunag 
kigatigom,"  udidan.  Midac  !gi/u  wa'kunag  Nanabuju  udu- 
migiwidiyan. 


Minawa    mi'tigonsan    ugra*nimindciminanan.       "Miskwa- 
20  bimagog  klgatigom  tciani'a^klyunk." 


5 1 .   NANABUSHU  AND  THE  MOOSE-HEAD. 

Midac  kra'nimadcad.  Midac  kmagickawad  ininiwan, 
a'pidci  uniciciwan.  'A,  migwanas  uctigwaning !  Nanabuju 
oganonan :  u 'A,  mdci,  anmdi  ajayan?" 


415 

50.    NANABUSHU  AND  THE  RUFFED  GROUSE. 

On  his  way  continued  Nanabushu  with  a  bottom  exceed 
ingly  sore.  Next  some  young  Ruffed  Grouse  he  found,  that 
were  sitting  down.  "What  is  the  name  of  your  mother?" 

"A  Frightener." 

"The  deuce!  she  is  a  frightener,"  said  Nanabushu.  And 
so  when  he  had  eased  himself  upon  them,  then  on  his  way 
he  went. 

Now,  when  home  was  come  the  old  Ruffed  Grouse,  she  saw 
her  children  covered  with  dung.  "Who  did  that  to  you?" 

"By  Nanabushu  were  we  eased  upon." 

Angry  was  the  Ruffed  Grouse.  So  she  followed  after 
Nanabushu,  and  in  the  path  ahead  of  him  the  Ruffed  Grouse 
alighted.  By  the  edge  of  a  cliff  was  Nanabushu  going, 
and  the  Ruffed  Grouse  was  hidden  among  the  balsams. 
And  when  by  the  place  Nanabushu  passed,  the  Ruffed 
Grouse  suddenly  flew  up  ;  with  all  her  might  she  flapped 
her  wings.  Ah!  then  off  tumbled  Nanabushu  over  the 
precipice.  And  then,  alighting  upon  his  buttocks,  down  he 
slid.  On  looking  up  at  the  precipice,  he  beheld  his  sores 
sticking  there  to  the  rock.  "Lichens  shall  you  be  called," 
he  said  to  them.  And  so  the  lichens  were  sores  from 
Nanabushu's  bottom. 

Next  he  went  grabbing  hold  of  the  shrubs  as  he  passed 
among  them.  "Red  willows  shall  you  be  called  till  the 
end  of  the  world." 

51.  NANABUSHU  AND  THE  MOOSE-HEAD. 

Thereupon  he  started  on  his  way.  And  then  he  met 
with  a  man,  very  handsome  was  he.  Ah,  the  feathers 
upon  his  head!  Nanabushu  spoke  to  him,  saying:  "Well, 
my  friend,  whither  are  you  bound?" 


416 
"A,  anicasago  nimbabamadis  •,   kinidac,  anindi  ajayan?"1 

"Ka,    anicaguna  gaya  nm   nimbabamadis."      Mi'tigwabln 
oda'kunan   Ia8a/u  inini,  Nanabujudac  oganonan :    "Ta,   nlclci 
kaegatsa/    unicici    kimi'tigwab.      Skuma    blc,    mngagagwa- 
5   tagibina." 

"A,   kawin!      Kawlka  awiya  ninclawi'a'sl." 


"A,  mano,  nidci,  kanagago  adcina!"  Kinwanj  ugitacirnan. 
Kaga'pi  ugimlnigon  lni/u  mi'tigwabln,  Nanabujudac  uga- 
gwadagibinan  mi'tigwabin.  "Taa,  kaegatsa'  minwagizi. 

10  Skuma  win  1'i'wa  kidasawan."  Kinwanj  anawi  oglsagi'ta- 
gon,  kaga'pl  oglmlnigon.  Ml'i'dac  ka'i'jinabisitod  ri'man 
atcabink ;  mi'i'dac  kagwatagibinat  Nanabucu  mi'tigwabin, 
mri/>u  ka'i'jipimwad  Ini/u  ininiwan  kanagickawa'pan.  Mon- 
zunk  ki'i  jinaguziwan  a'pl  ganisat ;  a'pidci  wminowan.  Kistci- 

15  minwandam  Nanabuju  kistciwlsinit.  Ml'i'dac  ka'ijipigickij- 
wad  !ni/u  monzon,  a'pidcidac  wanicicink  wiyas  ugikijizan 
wamidcit;  pimida  gaya.  Ka'kljidanik,  midac  kl'a-gwa'i'za- 
lkwat.  Cl'gv/a  wlmadandcigat,  kiziba'kwat.  "Tcien,  tcie11," 
inwanik.  Kawin  omino'tanzln.  "Icta,  pizan  taga!"  Acka- 

20  migu  kijiwa  ri/<u  kizlba'kwat.  Nanabujudac  klpasigwl, 
oglmanijan  pangl  ojobln.  Midac  adank  ri/i11  kizlba'kwat : 
"K^gatsa7  kidombigis.  Klwanickwam  wlwlsiniyan.  Owa  gaya 
gin  mldcin."  Midac  Nanabuju  a'tod  rix'u  pimida  kizlba 
'kwat  oglta'kwamigun.  Mri'man  kra/godcink  kistciginwanc, 

25   plnic     anode    awaslyag  ma-rnganag;    kwingwa'a'gag, 

1  Translated  by  the  editor. 


"Oh,  I  am  just  simply  travelling  about;  and  you,  where 
are  you  going?" 

"Oh,  I  too  am  simply  wandering  aimlessly  about."  A 
bow  the  man  held  in  his  hand,  and  Nanabushu  addressed 
him,  saying:  "Why,  my  friend,  truly  handsome  is  your 
bow.  Just  you  hand  it  over  to  me,  I  want  to  see  how 
it  pulls." 

"Ah,   no!   never  do   I   turn  it  over  to  any  one." 

"Oh,  please,  my  friend,  just  only  for  a  moment!"  A 
long  while,  he  coaxed  him.  At  last  he  was  given  the 
bow,  and  Nanabushu  tested  the  spring  of  the  bow.  "  Why, 
to  be  sure,  it  pulls  finely.  Just  (hand  me)  over  that  arrow 
of  yours."  With  all  his  pleading,  yet  a  long  while  was 
it  withheld  from  him,  but  finally  it  was  given  to  him. 
Thereupon  he  fitted  it  in  place  on  the  bowstring ;  and 
when  Nanabushu  pulled  upon  the  bow,  he  thereupon  shot 
the  man  whom  he  had  met.  Like  a  moose  he  looked, 
after  (Nanabushu)  had  slain  him ;  he  was  ever  so  fat. 
Highly  pleased  was  Nanabushu  to  have  a  great  heap  of 
food.  Accordingly  he  cut  the  moose  up  into  pieces,  and 
very  nice  was  the  meat  he  cooked  to  eat ;  and  the  grease 
too  (was  savory).  When  it  was  done,  he  accordingly  took 
it  out  of  the  kettle.  Just  as  he  was  on  the  point  of  eating, 
there  was  a  creaking  noise.  "Tcie11,  tcien !"  was  the  way 
it  sounded.  He  did  not  like  the  sound.  "Now,  do  you 
keep  silent !"  Still  louder  grew  the  noise  of  the  creaking. 
Nanabushu  rose  to  his  feet,  sliced  off  a  little  bit  of  (fatty) 
tenderloin.  And  then  he  said  to  the  creaking  noise  :  "Really, 
too  much  of  a  noise  are  you  making.  You  are  annoying 
me  when  I  want  to  eat.  This  too  do  you  eat."  And 
when  Nanabushu  placed  the  fat  in  where  the  creaking 
noise  was  made,  he  was  caught  fast.  Accordingly  there 
he  hung  for  a  great  while,  until  all  sorts  of  game-folk  - 

27— PUBL.    AMER.    ETHN.    SOC.    VOL.    VII. 


418 

udclgag,    wagucag  gltagwicinog    kra'rnwawad   mozon ; 

kagagiwag  gaya.  Panima  ka'kina  ka'kidamunt  lasa/u  mons 
mri'-"  pidclnag,  kipagidamigut  Nanabuju  ri'-u  kizlba'kwat. 
Alpidci  wiwisini  krija  iiman  abini'pan  lni/u  mozon.  Mlya'ta 
5  ulkanan  a'tanig,  ustigwanigagan  kaya  a'tani.  Medac  ajiwa- 
bamad  wawabiganodclya9  plndiganit  iman  mons  ustigwanig. 
Owabandan  pangl  a'tanig  winindip.  "A'pagic  mldciyan  !" 
inandam  mldac  ajikanonat  wawabiganodciyac :  "Kitagackitd 
nawana  gaya  nln  ri/fU  tcri'niginiyan  ayaniginiyag?" 


10        "A,  kawin !"  udigon.      "Uzam  kimindit,"  udjgon. 

"A,   manii  kayanln   mwlplndiga  iman  mons  ustigwaning!" 
"Awawisa^"  udigon.      "Oman  ya'ta  kistigwaning  klgada- 
ganci/nye." 

Midec  wawabiganodciyink  gi'i'ni'kuguictigwanat.     Mldac 

15   kl'pmdi'kwanit,    "Pa'kagu   wlsinin,"  udigon.      "Kagu  umbi- 

'kwani'kan,"    udigon.      Uzamidac   Nanabuju  kru-mbi'kwani, 

mldec    ka'ijimistcanik    ustigwan.      Kawin  kikackru'sl  tcigl- 

tcigu'tad.     Mldac    ka'ijimadcad  tibraj'agwan  ^  kawin  owa- 

bandanzln  ajad.     Ka'kina  mi'tigon  pa'ta'kucink  ugagwatci- 

20  man:    "Awanan 


Mina'i'k  naningudino ;  wlgwas  namngutino ;  azatiwan 
ninguting.  Mlnawa  mi'tigon  opi'ta'kuckawan,  "Awanan 
gin?"  udinan.  Kl'ijiksa.  "Mlsax  pacur  tclgibik  indayamitug," 
inandam.  Wipagu  kaegat  nibi  uda'kugadan.  Mldac  igu 
25  kwaya'k  ka'a'ni'i'jinlminaslt,  kra'nipimadaga  kwaya'kigu 
ajad.  Awiya  unundawan  plpaginit  anicinaban :  BA8e,  nacka 
kuca7,  mons  pamadagat !  ;Aa/u!  mawinadawatawe !" 


419 

wolves,  martens,  fishers,  foxes  —  arrived  to  eat  the  moose; 
ravens  too  (arrived).  Not  till  the  whole  of  the  moose  was 
eaten  up,  was  Nanabushu  freed  from  the  grip  of  the 
creaking  place.  Very  eager  was  he  to  eat,  and  he  went 
over  to  where  the  moose  had  been.  Only  its  bones  were 
left,  its  skull  was  there  too.  Thereupon  he  saw  some 
mice1  go  into  the  head  of  the  moose.  He  saw  that  a 
little  bit  of  the  brains  was  left.  "Would  that  I  might 
eat  it !"  he  thought.  Thereupon  he  spoke  to  the  mice, 
saying :  "  Could  you  bring  it  about  so  that  I  might  be  of 
the  same  size  as  you  ?" 

"Ah,  no!"  he  was  told.  "Of  too  large  a  size  are  you," 
he  was  told. 

"Ah,  please  let  me  go  into  the  head  of  the  moose  too!" 

"All  right,  then,"  he  was  told.  "Only  here  at  your  head 
will  you  be  made  small." 

Thereupon  like  unto  the  head  of  a  mouse  was  the  size 
of  his  head.  And  so  when  he  stuck  his  head  in,  "Slowly 
do  you  eat,"  he  was  told.  "Do  not  lift  your  head,"  he  was 
told.  Now,  too  high  Nanabushu  lifted  his  head,  whereupon 
the  size  of  his  head  enlarged.  He  was  unable  to  get  (his 
head)  free.  Thereupon  he  started  off,  not  knowing  whither 
he  was  going ;  he  did  not  see  whither  he  was  bound.  Every 
tree  he  bumped  against  he  asked  of  it :  "  Who  are  you  ?" 

A  tamarack  (it  was)  sometimes ;  a  birch  (it  was)  some 
times  ;  a  poplar  once.  Another  tree  he  bumped  against. 
"Who  are  you?"  he  said  to  it.  A  cedar  (it  was).  "Then 
close  to  the  edge  of  the  water  I  must  be,"  he  thought. 
Soon  then  really  into  the  water  he  stepped.  Thereupon, 
when  straight  into  the  water  he  went,  off  he  went  swim 
ming  towards  the  way  he  was  bound.  Some  people  he 
heard  calling  aloud  :  "  Hey !  Just  look !  a  moose  is  swim 
ming  by  !  Come  on  !  Let  us  go  for  him  !" 

1   In  another  version  it  was  the  flies. 


420 

Mldac  kaegat  ajipoziwad  anicinabag  wlnisawad  monzon. 
Nanabujudac  kiwackibagizo.  "A9e!  aja  wackataga!" 
Nanabuju  anigu'k  pimadaga.  Anicinabag  cigwa  pacur 
pi-a-yawag.  Midac  Nanabuju  cigwa  taba'kinank,  mldac 
5  acimadclpa'tod  pagwana,  kawin  owabandanzm  apa'tod. 
Mldac  kru-jajabi'kicink,  mri'dec  klpasesink  ri/<u  monsucti- 
gwanic.  Mri^dac  pidcmag  kiwabit.  Mri/<u  kra'nimadcl- 
pa'tod.  Nanabujun  win  ka'i'jinaguzinit ;  mra>4pana  tibi 
a'patogwan  Nanabuju. 


10       Mlsa1  a*kosit. 

52.   NANAP.USIIU  is  MIRACULOUSLY  FED  BEAR-GREASED 

Ningudingisa'    anipa    pimosaguban    Nanabuju,    me'i'dac 
a'pl  wadisat  adcidamon  tanit ;   krpmdigadac   andanit. 

Mri'dac  anandang  adcidamo  :  "  Ningatacama  Nanabuju." 
Medac  pa'tawlyas  kra^tod  onaganing,  mlnawadec  paejik 
15  onagans  ogimamon  wra^tod  pimida.  Medac  ka*i*jra'da- 
'pinad  udisinlman,  mldac  mo'koman  ajipajiba'O'dizut.  Medac 
iman  pimida  wandcidciwaninig,  pa'kic  nondaguzi :  "Tc!  tci 
tci  tci  tci  tci,  ma'ku  pimida!"  Medac  kra'camad  Nanabijun. 


Ka'i'skwawlsinit     Nanabuju,     "Kaya     nln     nlngatacama 
20  adcidamo,"  inandam.     Medac  mo'koman  odo'pinang,  mldac 
aji'u'da'pinat  udasiniman.     Medac  ka'i'jipajigibawad  udasi- 
mman,  mri'-u  klnisidizut. 

1   For  other  versions  see  Nos.   36  (p.   311)  and  40  (p.   341). 


421 

Thereupon  truly  into  their  canoes  went  the  people,  in 
the  hope  of  killing  the  moose.  Nanabushu  then  quickly 
turned  about.  "Hey!  He  is  turning  back!"  Nanabushu 
was  swimming  fast.  The  people  now  were  coming  close. 
And  when  Nanabushu  touched  bottom,  then  off  he  started 
running  without  knowing  where ;  he  did  not  see  whither 
he  was  running.  And  then  he  stumbled  and  fell,  where 
upon  he  cracked  that  wretched  head  of  the  moose.  And 
that  was  when  he  could  see.  Accordingly  away  he  started 
running.  Nanabushu  then  took  on  his  own  form ;  and  off 
he  ran,  no  one  knew  where. 

And  that  is  the  end  of  (the  story). 

52.   NANABUSHU  is  MIRACULOUSLY  FED  BEAR-GREASE. l 

Now,  once  upon  a  time  on  his  way  went  Nanabushu 
walking,  and  it  was  then  that  he  came  to  where  a  squirrel 
lived ;  and  he  went  into  where  (the  squirrel)  lived. 

Now,  this  thought  the  squirrel:  "I  will  feed  Nanabushu." 
And  so  when  some  dry  meat  he  had  placed  into  a  bowl, 
he  next  took  a  small  vessel  in  which  to  put  some  fat. 
Accordingly,  taking  hold  of  his  stone,3  he  then  pierced 
himself  (there)  with  a  knife.  Whereupon  from  thence 
flowed  some  grease,  at  the  same  time  he  was  heard  saying : 
"Tci  tci  tci  tci  tci  tcl,  bear-grease!"  Thereupon  he  fed 
Nanabushu. 

After  Nanabushu  had  finished  eating,  "So  will  I  too 
feed  the  squirrel,"  he  thought.  Thereupon  taking  a  knife, 
he  reached  hold  of  his  stone.  And  so  when  he  had  pierced 
his  stone,  he  accordingly  killed  himself.8 


2  A  synonym e  for  "testes." 

3  It  is  common  with  the  Ojibwas  of  Canada  to  have  Nanabushu  die  and  then  be 
fetched    back    to    life,  as  here;  the  same,  too,  with  his  grandmother.     This  element 
is  rather  out  of  keeping  with  the  tales  of  the  other  Ojibwas. 


422 

Adcidamodac  ogipapodanan  Nanabujun,  mri/<u  krpi- 
madci'a/d. 

53.  NANABUSHU  AND  THE  WOODPECKER.! 

Kra'nimadcadac  Nanabuju.  Mmawa  ogra/nro'disan  ma- 
maen  taanit  wlmbina'kadonk.  Mldac  ki'pindigat  andanit. 

5        Mamaedec  kra^kwandawa  Iman  pa'taclngwa'kung. 

Oganawabaman  andodaminit  Ini/u  mamaen.  Anigagwati- 
'kwa'u-  iman  mi'tigung ;  a'pidcidac  spimlng  kitci'a'nigu'k 
madwa/kwa/irt  mrivman  wandcipangicininit  asibanan.  Mi- 
wanini  ka'kljiswad  kl'a'camad  Nanabujun. 


10  Ackwawisinit  Nanabuju,  "Kaya  nm  nlngatacaman  mama." 
Npjidac  u'kanan  ogru'da'pinanan.  Medac  ka'i'jikaciga-a'ng 
namdawayaT,  mldac  kla'tod  udanigumang.  Medac  alkwan- 
dawat  iman  mi'tigung  kaya  win  kagwati'kwa11.  A'pidcidac 
icpimmg  ayat,  mri/<u  ki'tci'a'nigu'k  ajimadwa'kwa'u't.  Mli- 

15  dac  ajinisitizut.  Kawln  oginisasin  asibanan.  Mamandac 
oglpimadci'i'gon.  Mri/>u  kra'nimadcad. 


Misaguna  a'kozit. 

54.  NANABUSHU  MARRIES. 

Anlc,    ningudingsa    klnwan    Nanabucu   klbabimusa  paba- 

madisit,    wina'tagu    nici'ka.     Kaga'pl  ninguding  anicinaba" 

20  odotisan ;  ima  dac  ayawat  Igi/u  anicinabaeg  u'pimaya'r  dac 

ima    owabandan    wlgiwamans    ayanik.      Mldac    ka/rjinanzi- 

1  For  other  versions  see  Nos.   35  (p.  305)  and  42  (p.  357). 


423 

Now,  the  squirrel  breathed  upon  Nanabushu,  whereupon 
he  fetched  him  back  to  life. 


53.  NANABUSHU  AND  THE  WOODPECKER. l 

So  on  his  way  went  Nanabushu.  Next  "he  went  to  visit 
the  red-head  at  where  he  was  in  the  hole  of  a  tree.  And 
so  he  went  into  where  the  (red-head)  lived. 

Now,  the  red-head  climbed  up  a  dead  pine-tree. 

He  watched  what  the  red-head  was  doing.  (The  red 
head)  kept  testing  where  to  peck  on  his  way  up  the  tree ; 
and  when  very  high  up  was  heard  the  sound  of  him 
pecking  with  all  his  might,  then  down  from  there  came 
falling  a  raccoon.  That  was  what  he  cooked  when  he 
fed  Nanabushu. 

When  Nanabushu  was  done  eating,  "I  too  will  feed  the 
red-head."  Now,  two  bones  he  took.  And  so  when  he 
had  sharpened  them  at  both  ends,  he  accordingly  placed 
them  in  his  nostrils.  And  when  he  climbed  up  the  tree, 
he  also  tested  where  to  peck.  And  when  very  high  up 
he  was,  he  then  was  heard  pecking  with  all  his  might. 
Thereupon  he  killed  himself.  He  did  not  kill  a  raccoon. 
And  by  the  red-head  was  he  brought  back  to  life.  And 
so  on  his  way  he  went. 

And  that  is  as  far  as  (the  story)  goes. 

54.   NANABUSHU  MARRIES. 

Well,  once  on  a  time  they  say  Nanabushu  went  walking 
along,  travelling  from  place  to  place,  and  all  alone.  Then 
in  due  course  of  time  to  where  some  people  were  he  came ; 
now,  off  at  one  side  of  where  the  people  were,  he  saw  a 
small  wigwam  standing.3  Accordingly,  when  he  went  up 

2  Reference  is  to  the  menstrual  lodge, 


424 

'kang,  kita'pabi  dac  ickwandank  •  i'kwawan  owabaman 
namadabinit.  Kawin  kanaga  plnabislwan  •,  a'pri'dac  ka'ka- 
nimigut  mlkanonigut :  "Kagu  intawa  plndika'kan,"  udigon; 
"undcita  oman  nijika  nindaiya,"  udigon. 

5        "Mann,  ningapmdiga  !"  udinan. 

"Kago  pmdika'kan,''  udigon.     "Kawm  awiya  oma11  tapm- 
dikasl."      Kawin  kanaga  pi'irndci-i-nabislwan. 

Nanabucii  dac  a'pidci  inandam  wl'pmdigat,  midac  ka'i*- 
jiplndigat ;   mi  klnwan  awi'kwa  aji'a^pidcinawagi'kwanit. 

10  Panima  dac  wayabank  kiglcap  pitagwicinon  ogm  laVwi- 
lkwa  pi'a-camigut ;  pa'taniwlyas  patod  a11  mindimoya,  mrV'u 
ka'a'camat  udanisan. 

Nanabucu  dac  oganonan  Ini/u  mindimoyayan  :  "  Kawlnina 
nintawldigamasl  'afia/u  kitanis?" 

15  "Niya,"  i'kitu  'au  mindimoya;  "magwa  kuca  manido'u-i ! 
Kaya  dac  kawln  tibanindisusl,  osan  udibanimigon.  Ninga- 
wlndamawa  'a11  a'kiw^zl." 


"Anlc,  manosa7.  Minawa  na'kawa  ningababamadi's. 
Klnicwasugunaga'k  ningatagwicin,  mri/>u  tcibinandu  ki'kan- 
20  daman  kadi'kitogwan  au  alkiwanzi.w  Midac  ka/ijimadcat 
Nanabucu  klpabamadisit  no'piming ;  anodci  kagon  ubaba- 
ni'ton  madcit.  A4pri*dac  aninicwasugunagatinig  mri/<u 
cigwa  icat,  anotc  awaslyansa£  udanirnadclna55.  A'pl'i'dac 
ani'u'di'tang  iwa  wigiwamans  owabandan,  wawani  plnictci- 

1  Man  is  forbidden  to  enter  a  menstrual  lodge;   usually  an  old  woman  is  about, 
who  looks  after  the  wants  of  the  woman. 

2  A    woman    menstruating    is  to  be  avoided  for  the  evil  power  she  then  is  said 
to  have. 


425 

to  it,  he  peeped  in  at  the  entry-way;  a  woman  he  saw 
seated  there.  Not  even  did  she  glance  up  at  him ;  and 
when  his  presence  became  known,  then  was  he  spoken  to 
(in  these  words):  "Do  not  enter  in,  I  pray,"  he  was  told; 
"especially  since  I  am  here  alone,"  l  he  was  told. 

"Please  let  me  come  in!"  he  said  to  her. 

"Do  not  come  in,"  he  was  told.  "Nobody  is  allowed 
to  enter  here."  Not  even  did  she  look  up  (at  him)  from 
where  she  was. 

Now,  Nanabushu  was  very  keen  to  enter,  whereupon  he 
then  went  in  ;  then  they  say  the  woman  bowed  her  head, 
holding  it  very  low. 

Now,  by  and  by  on  the  morrow,  during  the  morning, 
hither  came  the  mother  of  the  woman,  bringing  food  to 
feed  her  (daughter)  •  dried  meat  was  what  the  old  woman 
fetched,  and  with  that  she  fed  her  daughter. 

Now,  Nanabushu  spoke  to  the  old  woman,  saying  :  "May 
I  not  marry  your  daughter?" 

"Dear  me!"  said  the  old  woman;  "why,  she  is  now  in 
the  condition  of  a  manitou  !  3  And  she  is  not  at  liberty 
yet  to  act  for  herself,  under  her  father's  control  is  she 
still.  I  will  tell  the  old  man  about  it." 8 

"Well,  all  right.  For  another  while  will  I  wander  about. 
At  the  end  of  seven  days  I  will  return,  then  will  I  come 
to  learn  what  the  old  man  shall  say."  Thereupon  departed 
Nanabushu,  travelling  from  place  to  place  inland ;  all  sorts 
of  things  he  killed  to  eat  during  his  wandering.  And 
when  the  seventh  day  was  drawing  on,  then  thither  he 
went.  And  when  he  got  up  to  the  small  wigwam,4  he  saw 
that  it  was  all  set  in  neat  order.  And  when  he  peeped 

:*  These  excuses  by  the  mother  are  only  a  formality.  She  really  has  more  to 
say  than  the  father,  and  could  have  given  the  answer  then.  It  is  a  point  not  to 
appear  too  anxious,  however  willing  one  may  be. 

4  This  is  given  as  the  same  little  wigwam,  but  as  a  matter  of  fact  it  would  be 
another  into  which  the  woman  would  go  after  her  illness. 


426 

gadanig.      A'pri'dac  ta'pabandank  iwa  wlgiwamans,  ubiga- 

nawabamigon  lni/u  i'kwawan.      "Amc,  kitaplndiga,"  udigon. 

Mri'dac  'a8a'wilkwa  agwatcing  kri'ja ;  midac  wabandank 

Nanabuco  ubimiwanan,  wlyas  a/tanig,  mizisa8  kaya  pinawa5: 

5   kaya.       Midac     awi'kwa     ka'ijitclba'kwat,     midac    a'kitut : 

"Ningatawinandumak      ninlngri'gog."        Mi      ka-ijimadcat 

'awi'kwa,    ugra-winanduman  osan  ugln  kaya.      Nlnganidac 

krpitagwicin   awilkwa. 

A'pri'dac    tagucinuwat   Igiwa    ki'tcra'nicinaba^g,   owaba- 

10  mawan     Nanabucon     namadabinit     agamindaslng.      Midac 

a'kitut    awa    a'kiwanzi :    "Anlc,   Nanabucu,   ninglwindamago 

4fiiu     ka/i-'kituwanan     ananimawatan     laVwi    nindanisinan. 

Kawin  a'pidci  kagon  uni'tawitosin,  nondasi."      Wawani  ugl- 

wlndamawan  Ini/u  Nanabucon.      "Kicpin  dac  anawanimasi- 

15   wat,    manosax    intawa    kitawidclwa."     Midac  ka'i'cipasigwit 

lasa/u    a'kiwanzi    oglsagini'kanan    udanisan,    Nanabucondac 

namadapinit    ogrirnabra/n.      Mri'dac  klkagl'kamawat  lni/u 

udanisiwan  wawani  tciwi'pimadisinit. 

Midac     ka'i'jiwlsiniwat.        Ka'i'ckwawlsiniwat     kfkanona 
20   Nanabuco:    "Amba,    pljayu'k  andayang,   kaya  klnawa  tci- 
pi'a'yayag  ima  oda'towad  anicinabag." 


Midac    ima    klna'a'ngabit ;    mojagidac   kinandawandciga, 

anode    kago    uni'ton    awasiya^.      Namngudino    upiwidclwan 

ma*kwan,  midac  ima  panima  pitagwicing  ickwandank  mrrma 

25   mwanawat.      Wlbadacigu  Nanabucu  kli'kitu  :  "WYkundiwin 


1   All  this  is  according  to  custom. 

'2  At    the    back    of   the    lodge,    the    proper  place  for  a  male  visitor  to  sit  where 
there  is  no  male  owner  of  the  lodge. 

3  These    words    are    purely  formal,  and  have  no  meaning.     A  parent  uses  them, 


427 

into  the  small  wigwam,  he  was  met  with  an  expectant  look 
from  the  woman.  "Well,  you  may  come  in,"  he  was  told. 

Thereupon  the  woman  went  out  of  doors ;  and  so,  when 
she  saw  Nanabushu's  pack,  meat  was  therein,  besides 
turkeys  and  ruffed  grouse.  And  so  when  the  woman  had 
cooked  a  meal,  she  then  said:  "I  will  go  ask  my  parents 
to  come."  Accordingly  then  departed  the  woman ;  she 
went  to  invite  her  father  and  mother.  Before  (their  arrival), 
back  home  had  come  the  woman.1 

Now,  when  the  old  folks  arrived,  they  saw  Nanabushu 
seated  in  the  space  behind  the  fire.2  Thereupon  said  the 
old  man:  "Well,  Nanabushu,  I  have  been  told  what  you 
said  concerning  the  way  you  feel  about  this  daughter  of 
ours.  She  is  not  so  very  smart  at  doing  things,  she  is 
dull." 3  He  was  careful  to  tell  Nanabushu  about  her. 
"So  if  you  are  not  disinclined  to  taking  her,  why,  you  may 
then  marry  her." 4  Thereupon  rising  to  his  feet,  the  old 
man  took  his  daughter  by  the  hand,  and  where  Nanabushu 
was  seated  he  had  her  sit  beside  him.  And  then  he 
charged  his  daughter  that  she  live  an  upright  life. 

Thereupon  they  ate.  After  they  had  eaten,  then  Nana 
bushu  was  told:  "Now,  do  you  come  to  where  we  live, 
so  that  you  also  may  dwell  yonder  where  the  people  have 
a  town."  5 

And  so  there  he  lived  with  the  people  of  his  wife ;  and 
continually  was  he  on  the  hunt  for  game,  every  kind  of 
game  he  killed.  Frequently  he  came  home  in  company 
with  a  bear,  and  not  till  he  was  come  there  at  the  door 
way  did  he  then  lay  it  low  with  a  club.  So  in  a  little 
while  Nanabushu  said :  "  A  feast  there  shall  be  of  game- 
no  matter  how  capable  his  daughter  is,  but  he  does  not  permit  any  one  else  to  say 
the  same  thing  of  her. 

4  Another    formal    statement  which  serves  to  put  the  responsibility  on  the  man. 

5  As  a  rule,  a  man  and  his  wife  do  not  go  away  at  once  to  live  by  themselves  ; 
they  live  a  while  either  with  his  parents  or  else  with  hers. 


428 

tcrirjictcigatanig   awasimldcim,   mizisa  gaya,  ka'kinagu  an- 
daswawanagisiwat,   pinewa8  gay  a." 

Midac  ka/rciwl'kumindwa  nlbiwa  anicinabaeg,  i'kwawag 
kaya.  Ka'i'ckwawl'kunding  dac  mri/<u  ka'i'crirdaminowat, 
5  plpagadowawag.  Pkwawag  kaya  pa'kan  klwadaminowag, 
klpapasi'kawawag.  Mldac  ka'i-'kidunk :  "Mlsa*!7*11  Nana- 
bucu  uwldigawin  nongum  wandci'u'daminuwin.  Ml  gadici- 
wabalk  awlya  kawldigadin,"  krr'kitowag. 

Mri'fU    kaya    wlnawa    ka'i'citcigawat    anicinabaeg    awlya 
10  kawldigadin. 

55.  THE  ORIGIN  OF  LIKENESSES  OF  NANABUSHU. 

Mldac  iman  monjag  ki*a*yat  la'a/u  Nanabucu.  Ningu- 
dingidac  kilkusiwag  Nanabucu  wlwan,  o'kumisandac  oglwl- 
dciwigowan.  Mojag  kra*ndawandciga.  Nanabuco,  amik- 
kwan  kaya  ogmodcra/n  ;  ani't  ogl'u  ji'ton  Nanabuco  mri/<u 
15  ka*a*batci'tot  ami'kwan  klpacipawat ;  mistcigi/u  ijini'kata 
lisi/u  ulkan  ka/uji'tot. 


Ningudingidac  ugimi'kawan  kistci-a'mikwa^  tanit  mrcrwii 
gi'tcikaming,  a'pidci  mamanditowan.  Mldac  anat  wiwan  : 
"Ninganodci'a-g  igi/u  ami'kwag."  Nljinon  Ini/u  ami'kwag 
20  andawat,  mi'i'we  pajik  Miming  minawadec  Micibigwado- 
minising.  Mi'i'we  kaya  ami'kwag  ka'tawagubanan.  Ugl- 
pigwa*a!nan  Ini/u  ami'kuwlcan.  Mri'dac  klbabamajagamat 
uwa  gistcigami ;  anint  uglnisan  ami'konsa8,  pajik  kaya  ki'tci 
ami'kwan ;  pajikidac  kistci  ami'kwan  kawm  umi'kawasln. 

1   The  ceremony   is  always  after  the  wedding. 

-  Pointed  with  a  single  barb.     The  shaft  is  longer  than  the  barb,  and  has  a  hole 
at  one  end  through  which  to  fasten  the  cord. 


429 

food,  and  of  turkeys,  and  of  every  kind  of  game  there 
is,  and  of  ruffed  grouse." 

And  so  there  were  invited  to  the  feast  many  men, 
women  too.  And  after  the  feast  was  over,  they  then  played 
games,  they  came  to  play  ball.  The  women  too  played 
a  different  game,  they  played  the  double-ball  game.  For 
it  was  said:  "This  is  Nanabushu's  wedding,  and  that  is 
why  to-day  we  play.  Thus  shall  it  ever  be  when  any  one 
is  married,"  (so)  they  said.1 

Thus  too  have  the  people  done  whenever  any  one  has 
married. 

55.    THE  ORIGIN  OF  LIKENESSES  OK  NANAP.USIIU. 

And  so  there  for  a  long  while  continued  Nanabushu. 
Now,  once  on  a  time  to  another  place  moved  Nanabushu 
and  his  wife,  and  by  his  grandmother  were  they  accom 
panied.  Ever  was  Nanabushu  in  quest  of  game,  for  beavers 
too  he  hunted ;  a  harpoon  Nanabushu  made,  and  that  was 
what  he  used  when  he  speared  the  beaver ;  spine-of-a- 
pickerel-fm  is  the  name  of  the  bone  (point) "  which  he  made. 

Now,  once  he  found  a  place  over  here  in  the  sea  where 
the  great  beavers  dwelt,  they  were  very  huge.  Thereupon 
he  said  to  his  wife:  "I  am  going  after  these  beavers." 
Two  were  the  places  where  those  beavers  dwelt :  one  was 
over  here  at  Isle  Royal,3  and  the  other  was  at  Michipicoten 
Island.4  Now,  those  were  the  places  where  the  beavers 
dwelt.  He  destroyed  the  beaver  dwellings.  Thereupon 
he  wandered  away,  following  the  shore  of  this  sea;  some 
of  the  small  beavers  he  killed,  one  large  beaver  too ;  but 
one  other  large  beaver  he  did  not  find.  So  at  last  he 


3  West  and  not  far  from  Fort  William. 

4  North  of  Sault  Ste  Marie. 


430 

Kaga'prrdac  kri'nandam:  "Intawa  ningaplgwa'a/n  Ii8i/u 
u'kunim,  manodac  ta'i'ska'ta  o'o*  kistcigami,  mri''u  tcimi- 
lkawag  'aV11  ami'k." 

Mldac  ka*i*jiwijamat  o'kumisan  iwiti  u'kuniming.  A'pl- 
5  'i'dac  ka'pigwa'a'nk  'ifii/u  u^unim,  "Mloman  ayan,  kanawan- 
dan  tcipimabonusik  'a^11  ami'k,"  udinan.  A !  mldac  klslgi- 
dciwank  i'i-u  nibi.  Minawadac  Nanabuco  klmadciyacagama 
owa  kistcigami.  Mldac  ima  Micibigwadominising  klajawi- 
kwaskunit ;  magwadac  ima  nlbawit  owabaman  nigigwan 
10  aniniska'tanik.  Mldac  ka'i'jiminawa'a'jawigwaskunit,  mldac 
ima  ugrirjacicing  ajajklkang.  Mldac  kapasigwit,  uglpa'pi- 
'ton  i'i'ma11  kra/na'kwitiyacing .  uwlngagu  ajinagusit  ijina- 
gwatini.  "Manu,  nocicanyag  pitclnag  kadanipimadisiwat 
ugaba'pi'tonawa." 


15  Mldac  ka'i'jino'pinanat  Ini/u  nigigwan  uglpajipa'wan  48i/u 
mistcigiwani't.  Wiwlsini  klwan.  "Intawa  a'kawa  ninga- 
tamwa  'a8a/u  nigig,"  kri'nandam.  Mldac  ka-ijipa'kunat, 
klpodawa;  mldac  ajra'pwad.  A'pri'dac  ka'kijiswat  mri/<u 
ajiwawanabit.  Uglpada'kinan.  Cigwadac  kamanicank 

20  pajik  48i/u  nigikutawag,  mri/<u  nondawat  o'kumisan  madwa- 
kwlckucinit  iwiti  Bawi'ting.  Mldac  ka/rjipasingutcisat, 
klmadclba'tod.  A'pri'dac  pagamiba'tod  iwiti  Bawi'ting, 
"Anln?"  udinan  o'kumisan. 


Mldac    a'kitut    'afia/u    ma'ka'klmindimoya :    "Aja   a'pami, 
25   klpimabonu  a11  ami'k." 

1  At  the  head  of  Sault  Ste   Marie.     By  destroying  it,  the  rapids  were  made. 

2  The  usual  expression  is  "my  nephews,"  which  implied  also  "my  aunts,"  meaning 
the  people. 


thought:  "Therefore  I  will  destroy  the  (beaver)  dam,1  no 
matter  if  this  sea  should  go  dry,  for  then  I  shall  find  the 
beaver." 

Thereupon  he  had  his  grandmother  go  with  him  to 
yonder  (beaver)  dam.  And  when  he  had  demolished  the 
dam,  "In  this  place  do  you  remain,  do  you  watch  that 
the  beaver  does  not  float  by  with  the  current,"  he  said 
to  her.  Ah !  and  then  out  the  water  flowed.  So  once 
more  Nanabushu  set  out,  following  the  shore  of  this  sea. 
And  then  across  to  Michipicoten  Island  he  leaped ;  and 
while  he  was  standing  over  there,  he  saw  an  otter  where 
the  water  was  running  low.  Accordingly  back  across  he 
leaped,  whereat  he  slipped  and  fell  in  the  mud.  And  so, 
when  he  rose  to  his  feet,  he  laughed  at  the  spot  where 
he  had  left  an  imprint  of  his  bottom ;  precisely  like  the 
form  on  him  was  the  way  it  looked.  "No  matter,  let  my 
grandchildren  3  that  shall  live  hereafter  have  it  to  laugh  at." 

And  when  he  pursued  the  otter,  he  pierced  it  with 
the  fin  spine  of  his  harpoon.  He  was  eager  to  eat,  they 
say.  "Accordingly  before  (proceeding  further)  I  will  eat 
the  otter,"  he  thought.  And  so,  when  he  had  flayed  it, 
he  built  a  fire ;  thereupon  he  roasted  it  on  the  spit.  And 
when  he  had  finished  cooking  it,  he  then  sat  down.  He 
stuck  (the  spit  into  the  ground)  with  (the  otter  still)  on  it. 
And  when  with  a  knife  he  sliced  off  one  of  the  otter's 
ears,3  he  then  heard  the  sound  of  his  grandmother  whistling 
off  yonder  at  the  Sault.  Thereupon  leaping  to  his  feet, 
he  started  off  a-running.  And  when  he  came  running  up 
to  yonder  Sault,  "What  (is  it)?"  he  said  to  his  grandmother. 

Thereupon  said  the  old  Toad- Woman :  4  "It  is  gone, 
floating  with  the  current  went  the  beaver." 

3  The  otter  on  the  spit  can  be  seen,  so  it  is  said,  as  a  shaft  of  rock  on  the 
Wisconsin  shore  of  Lake  Superior. 

nother  name  for  Mother  Earth,  or  the  grandmother  of  Nanabushu. 

fj 

VYU.  -  ' 


432 

A^I'tci  niskadisit  dac  lasa/u  Nanabucu  mri/iU  ka/ijimwa- 
na'wat  o'kumisan.  Miziwadac  klmiskwiwabi'ka  iu  wadci11. 
"Oma'ka'klwabi'kunk  ta'i'cini'kata,"  krr'kitu  Nanabucu. 

Mldac  rrwiti  anuglpaba'a/ndawabamat  lni/u  ami'kwan, 
5  kawmdac  ugimi'kawasln.  Mlnawadac  krpiklwii,  kayabi 
ki'pabanandawabandcigat  kayabi  tcra'yanit  ami'kwan  ;  ka 
wmdac  awiya  oglmi'kawasln.  Miziwa  anugipaba'i'ja ;  ima 
wlcan  ka'u'ndclplgu'ank,  rniya'ta  mi'tigdn  piwandamowat 
ami'kwag  kawabandangin. 


10  Minawadac  kra'nikiwa'a'yacagama.  Tasing  aniwaban- 
dangin  rrma  krircacicingiban,  ugi'tciba'piton.  Mldac  ima 
Micibigwato  wl'kwadunk  mri'ma  ka'iji'U'nabit.  "Kicpin 
anicinabaeg  kabimiwabamiwat  kicpin  pang!  asaman  mlciwat 
nandawandamowat  tcinama'a'mowat,  mri/>u  pang!  tciboda- 

15   dcigayan." 

Mldacigu  ima  a'pana  namadabit,  anicinaba  klnamadabit 
mri/>u  ajinagwa'k  i'i*u  asin.  Mldac  igu  kaga't  ajiwaba'k  -, 
kicpin  awlya  pang!  a'paginat  asaman,  "Nanabuju!  kibln- 
da'konin  ningawinamaamin,"  mlgu  kaga't  ajinamaanigwa'k. 

20        Mlsa1  a'kosit,  pinawidis  kl*a-goda. 


56.   NANABUSHU  FLIP:S  WITH  THE  GEP:SK. 
/ 

Ningudingisa  minawa  anipapimosaguban  Nanabuju,  midac 
ajiwabamad  minawa  nilkas  ayanit  iman  saga'i'gamng.  Mldac 
ajikanonat :  "Taga,  kaya  nm  ajinagusiyag  iji'i'ciyu'k." 

1  In  various  places  in  the  Ojibwa  country  may  be  observed  a  rock,  island,  or 
high  land  looking  like  a  human  being  either  reclining  or  seated,  when  seen  from  the 
distance,  and  it  is  generally  called  Nanabushu. 


433 

And  so  angry  was  Nanabushu,  that  he  then  smote  his 
grandmother  (till  she  was  dead).  And  everywhere  was 
the  mountain  reddened  with  blood.  "Toad  Mountain  shall 
it  be  called,"  said  Nanabushu. 

Thereupon  off  yonder  he  wandered,  looking  in  vain  for 
the  beaver,  but  he  did  not  find  it.  So  again  he  turned 
his  way  homeward,  still  yet  was  he  roaming  from  place 
to  place  to  find  if  yet  there  were  any  beavers ;  but  he 
found  none.  Everywhere  he  went  wandering,  but  with 
out  success ;  there  where  he  had  broken  up  the  beaver 
dwellings,  all  that  he  saw  were  the  logs  which  the  beavers 
had  gnawed  to  pieces. 

So  again  he  turned  back  home,  going  by  way  of  the 
shore.  As  often  as  he  beheld  the  places  on  the  way 
where  he  had  slipped  and  fell,  heartily  he  laughed  at  them. 
And  so  yonder  at  Michipicoten  Bay  was  where  he  sat 
down.  "If  people  behold  me  when  passing  by,  if  they 
should  give  me  a  little  tobacco  in  their  wish  for  a  fair 
wind,  then  gently  would  I  blow  (with  my  breath)." 

And  so  there  he  still  sits,  like  a  person  sitting  is  the 
way  the  rock  looks.1  And  that,  sure  enough,  is  what  hap 
pens  ;  if  any  one  offers  a  little  tobacco  (with)  a  O  Nana 
bushu  !  I  come  with  an  offering  to  you,  we  wish  for  a 
fair  wind,"  then  verily  there  comes  up  a  fair  wind. 

That  is  as  far  as  the  story  goes,  the  gizzard  of  the 
ruffed  grouse  now  hangs  aloft. 

56.  NANABUSHU  FLIES  WITH  THE  GEESE. 2 

Now,  once  again  was  Nanabushu  travelling  along,  when 
he  then  saw  some  more  geese  that  were  in  a  lake. 
Thereupon  he  spoke  to  them,  saying:  "Pray,  do  you  make 

2  For  another  version  see  No.   15   (p.    127). 

28—  -PUBL.    AMER.    ETHN.    SOC.    VOL.    VII. 


434 

Kinwa^j  ogltajima8.  Kaga'pl,  "  'Awisa,"  udigon.  Mri'dac 
paepacik  ka-rjimmigut  umlguniwan.  A'prrdac  tayapisanit 
mlgwana8,  mri''u  kaega't  ni'king  krijinaguzit  Nanabuju. 
Klpazigwa'u-  gayawm  klpabawidclwad  ni'ka8.  A4pri*dac 
anitagwagininik,  "Misa  cigwa  tcimadcayank,"  udigon. 
Mri'dac  cigwa  pazigwa-crwat,  cawanunk  ani'i'jawad  naga- 
mowag : 


"A'i'natinag  kijiga  a'i-natciwasayani. 
A-rnatinag  kijiga  iri-natciwascayani. 
A'i'natinag  kijiga  a'rnatciwasayani." 

Mri'dac  agut:  "Kagu  miziwa  inabi'kan,  kwaya'kigu 
ajayank  inabin.  Cigwa  pacu/  anicinabek  oda'towag  kada- 
nri'jayank.  Kagux  kanaga  inabi'kan.  Tamadwanandnda- 
gusiwag  anicinabek.  Kagu'  kanawabama'kan." 


1 5  A'pi  ani'irdi'tamuwad  anicinaba8  oda{!tonit  cigwa  waba- 
mawag  ni'kag  pimisawad.  "A'a,  inaska  kuca  ni'kag ! 
Kaegatsa  mindi'to  paejik  laca/u  ni'ka !"  Anode  madwiri'n- 
wa'kazowag  anicinabeg.  Kaga'pl  krrnabi  Nanabuju,  mri/<u 
ka'ijipi'taganamigut  umngwiganang,  klpo'kwisani  uningwi- 

20  gan  ;   mldac  klpangicink  Nanabuju. 

"E'e1,  paejik  pangicin  ni'ka !"  Uglnodci'a'wan,  ugipaba- 
minlca'a'wawan  wltabibinawat.  A'pri'dac  wadcanimi-i'nt, 
indawa  kipasigwi.  "WrH'H,  Nanabujun  nangwana  ka'i*- 
jinagwi'U'nit !"  Mldac  klki'tcipa'pi'a'wad  Nanabujiin. 


25        I}inawidis  kra'goda. 


435 

me  look  the  same  as  you."  A  long-  while  was  he  coaxing 
them.  At  last,  "All  right,"  he  was  told.  Accordingly 
by  each  one  was  he  given  a  feather.  And  when  the 
number  of  feathers  was  enough  (to  cover  him),  then  truly 
like  a  goose  was  the  look  of  Nanabushu.  Up  he  also 
flew  when  he  went  about  in  company  with  the  geese. 
And  when  it  was  getting  well  on  towards  the  fall,  "There 
fore  now  is  it  time  for  us  to  be  going  away,"  he  was  told. 
Thereupon  then  up  they  rose  on  the  wing,  as  on  their 
way  southward  they  went,  (and)  they  sang : 

"By  way  of  the  mountain-ranges  do  I  fly  along  through  the  sky, 
By  way  of  the  mountain-ranges  do  I  fly  along  through  the  sky, 
By  way  of  the  mountain-ranges  do  I  fly  along  through  the  sky." 

And  then  he  was  told:  "Do  not  look  everywhere,  but 
straight  toward  the  way  we  are  bound  do  you  look.  For 
not  far  away  do  some  people  dwell  in  a  town  who  shall 
be  in  the  way  of  our  course.  Do  not  for  any  reason  look. 
Everywhere  will  be  heard  the  voices  of  the  people  shouting. 
Do  not  look  at  them." 

When  they  came  to  where  the  people  lived  in  a  town, 
already  were  the  geese  seen  flying  past.  "Hey!  Just  look 
at  the  geese!  Truly  big  is  one  of  the  geese!"  All  sorts 
of  noise  did  the  people  make.  At  last  did  Nanabushu 
look,  whereupon  he  was  accidentally  hit  on  the  wing, 
broken  was  his  wing ;  and  then  down  fell  Nanabushu. 

"Hey!  One  of  the  geese  is  falling!"  They  went  after 
it,  they  chased  it  hither  and  thither  to  capture  it.  And 
when  he  was  on  the  point  of  being  brought  to  bay,  he 
thereupon  rose  to  his  feet.  "Wl'i'i'i,  that  was  what  Nana 
bushu  made  himself  look  like!"  And  so  they  laughed 
heartily  at  Nanabushu. 

The  gizzard  of  the  ruffed  grouse  hangs  aloft. 


436 

SERIES  VIII.     Nos.  57-63. 

57.  NANABUSHU  AND  THE  FISH-TRAP. 

Ningutingsa  klwan  aTndawag  Nanabuco  o'kumisan  kaya. 
Mldac  klwan  anat  ocisan  :  "Nojis,"  udinan,  "iwa  zibi  pacu' 
ka/a'yamaga'k,  mfku  ima  plndcibonaganan  uji'a;walpan 
i'ku  kicicanibamg,"  udinan. 

5  Nanabucudac  win  kawm  kago  i'kitusi.  Miya'tagu  a'pana 
nandawantcigat  pabltod  kago  andawat.  A'pidcima  kaya 
Nanabucu  klml'kawiinimwi  Ina'tisokasu.  Ningutingidac, 
klwaku  a'i'ndawat,  omi'kwandan  ka'i'gu'pan  o'kumisan 
undci  tcipintcibonaganikat  pawi'tigunk.  Mldec  Nanabucu 
10  anandank :  "Icta  mltagic  ka/rci'pan  nokkomis  tciplntcibona- 
gani'kayan.  Magica  no'knmis  aiya'kusitug  panii  wiyas 
mldcit,"  inandam  Nanabuco.  "Klngonyandac  kanabatc 
uwl'a'mwan,"  inandam.  Mldac  anat:  "Nolkumis,  ka'i'ci- 
yambanidac  undcipmdcibonagani'kayan  ?" 


15  "Aya8,"  i'kitu  mindimoya.  "Imaguta  bawi'tigunk  mli- 
maa'ku  pmdcibonawa'pan  klngonyag  kicicayabanlg,"  udinan. 
"Ki'tcinanibiwa,  kinlni'ku,  unisawabanln  kingonyac,"  udigon 
o'kumisan. 

Mldec    kaga't  Nanabuco  madci'tad  ujra/t  pindcibonaga- 

20  nan,   kistcimiltigon   udayawatciniganan,  wasa  kaya  udonda- 

wanan,    wlsongi'tod    uplndcibonaganan.      Mldac    ka'klci'a't 

wlndamawat  o'kumisan,   midac  anat:    "Ml,   no'kumis,   kl'kl- 


437 

SERIES  VIII.     Nos.  57-63. 

57.    NANABUSHU  AND  THE  FISH-TRAP. 

Once  on  a  time  they  say  that  Nanabushu  and  his  grand 
mother  were  abiding  there.  And  so  they  say  that  she 
said  to  her  grandson:  "My  grandson,"  she  said  to  him, 
"over  there  hard  by  is  a  river,  and  it  was  there  your 
uncles  of  old  used  to  set  fish-traps,"  she  said  to  him. 

Now,  Nanabushu,  so  .far  as  he  was  concerned,  had  nothing 
to  say.  His  only  occupation  was  always  hunting  for  game 
(and)  bringing  something  home.  And  very  lucky  too  was 
Nanabushu  at  getting  game,  to  judge  from  his  fame  in 
story.  Now,  once  on  a  time  they  say  that  while  they 
were  living,  (there),  he  remembered  what  his  grandmother 
had  said  to  him  about  going  to  catch  fish  with  the  fish- 
trap  at  the  rapids.  Thereupon  Nanabushu  thought:  "Quite 
so,  that  is  what  my  grandmother  had  told  me,  that  I 
should  go  to  catch  fish  with  the  fish-trap.  Perhaps  my 
grandmother  may  have  grown  tired  of  always  eating  meat," 
thought  Nanabushu.  "Now,  fish  she  probably  wants  to 
eat,"  he  thought.  Thereupon  he  said  to  her:  "My  grand 
mother,  (you  remember)  what  you  told  me  about  catching 
fish  with  a  fish-trap?" 

"Yes,"  said  the  old  woman.  "It  was  at  yonder  rapids 
where  your  uncles  of  old  used  to  fish  with  a  fish-trap," 
she  said  to  him.  "Oh,  great  indeed  was  the  number  of 
fishes  they  used  to  kill,"  he  was  told  by  his  grandmother. 

And  then  truly  did  Nanabushu  begin  making  his  fish- 
traps,  huge  logs  he  carried  on  his  shoulders,  and  from 
afar  he  carried  them  on  his  back,  (for)  he  wanted  to  make 
his  traps  strong.  And  then  after  he  had  finished  them 
he  notified  his  grandmother,  and  this  he  said  to  her : 


ci'a'g     pmdcibonagan,     mldac    klngon    tcrarmwat,"    udinan 
o'kumisan. 

"Aya8,"  i'kitu  mindimoya. 

Mldac    weyabaninig    Nanabucu    kra'wiwabamat    upmdci- 
5   bonaganan,  nlbawa  dac  k!ngonyan  klplndciposowan  ;  mldac 
Nanabucu  kl'klwawanat.    Ani'a'yat  dac  pacu7  anri-'kitu  Na 
nabucu  :    "No'kumis!    nlbawa  kPgoyag  mingmisag,"  i'kito. 


Mldac  kaga't  mindimoya  kistciminwandank. 

Mldac    a*rndawat,    nibiwa    kPgoyan    Nanabucu    onisan. 

10  Ningudingidacigu    magwa    nandciplndcibonaganat,    ononda- 
wan  awiya  pinondagusinit,  inwanit   "—  — ,  -  — !" 

Acri'nabit  Nanabucu,  andutank,  wlkatcina'u't  wagunan 
ka'i'nwanik ;  magwadac  andutank  sasi'ka  unondawan 
ketcipacu :  "Tcike  tcike,  tcik"  kayadac  minawa  tibicko : 

15    "—  — ,  -  -!"     Mldac    Nanabuco    wawlp  nawa- 

tcipinat  uginkonya8,  madciba'tod ;  ka'a'niwawajacacakucin- 
gigo  Nanabucu.  Klwaba'tod  i'kitut  dac  anitagwicing : 
"No'kumidida,  awiya  ninnondawa!" 


"Anm  anwat?" 
20  — ,  -  -  F   ml'a'nwat,"  udinan. 

Mldac  a/kitut  mindimoya :  "  Aa,  kwlngwlci7  udinawabanm 
kicicanyabanlg !"  udinan.  "Wlwlsini,  klnandudamag  tci'a*- 
camat  pa'irndcri'nwat.  Klngonyan  acam,"  udinan. 


Midac     kaga't    Nanabucu    uta'pinat    kingonyaL',    paginal 
25   anlndi  ina'kakaya  ka'tani'tang.    Mldac  minawa  weyabaninig 


439 

"There,  my  grandmother,  have  I  finished  the  fish-traps, 
and  now  some  fish  will  you  eat,"  he  (thus)  said  to  his 
grandmother. 

"Ay,"  said  the  old  woman. 

So  then  in  the  morning  Nanabushu  went  to  see  his 
fish-traps,  and  many  the  fish  that  were  drawn  into  them  ; 
thereupon  Nanabushu  went  back  home,  carrying  them  along. 
And  as  he  was  drawing  near,  Nanabushu  went  along, 
saying:  "O  my  grandmother!  many  fishes  have  I  killed," 
he  said. 

Thereupon  truly  was  the  old  woman  highly  pleased. 

And  so  while  they  remained  there,  many  fishes  Nana 
bushu  slew.  And  now,  once  on  a  time  while  he  was  out 
hunting  for  fish  at  his  traps,  he  heard  the  approaching 
sound  of  some  creature.  The  sound  it  uttered  was:  "- 

— ,  -  -!"     Up    Nanabushu    looked,   he  listened 

for  it,  for  he  wanted  to  be  sure  of  what  was  making  the 
noise ;  and  while  he  listened  for  it,  suddenly  he  heard  it 
very  close  :  "Tcike,  tcike,  tcik  !"  And  then  again  the  same  : 
" —  —  — ,  -  - !"  Thereupon  Nanabushu  quickly 

gathered  up  his  fishes,  (and)  started  running ;  (and)  on  the 
way  Nanabushu  went  slipping  on  the  logs  and  knocking 
off  the  bark.  On  the  way  home  he  ran,  and  said  as  he 
was  arriving:  "O  my  grandmother!  I  hear  something." 

"How  did  it  sound?" 

" l—  — ,  -  -!'   was  the  way  it  sounded,"   he 

said  to  her. 

And  then  said  the  old  woman:  "Why,  a  Canada  jay 
is  what  your  uncles  of  old  used  to  call  it!"  she  said  to 
him.  "That  it  wanted  to  eat,  (and)  was  begging  of  you 
to  feed  it,  was  why  it  cried  out  in  that  way.  Feed  it 
some  fish,"  she  said  to  him. 

Thereupon  truly  Nanabushu  took  the  fishes,  (and)  threw 
part  of  them  towards  the  place  where  he  had  heard  the 


440 

Nanabucu  nandciplndcibobaganat,  ml  mlnawa  awiya  klnon- 
dawat  nodagusinit.  Mldac  ka*rcipaginat  klngonyan  anda- 
ni'tang,  mi'kwandank  o'kumisan  ka/i'gut  pitclnago.  Ka- 
wlndac  mamwatc  wl'klwapitosl.  Mldac  mlnawa  aniklwat, 
5  anrrnat  o'kumisan:  "Awiya  mlnawa  ninglnontawa  nonda- 
gusit,  mi'ta'kamig  tanwawitam." 


Mldac   agut :    "Aa,   cangwaci  au  udinawabanin  kicicanya- 
banig.      Kigra'camana  ?" 

"Aye9,"  i'kitu   Nanabucu. 

10  "Mri'wagwaya'k,"  udigon  o'kumisan.  "Nojis!"  udigon ; 
"nlbawa  awiya,  aya'a'wicansag  klga'u'disigunanig,  mlcigu 
a'pana  tci'a'camatwa,"  udinan.  "  Kmantawiskatagok  tci'a*- 
camatwa  wlwisiniwag  kaya  winawa." 


Mldac    kiwan    Nanabucu    minawa    natciplndciponaganat. 

15   Nibiwa  a'pitci  onisan  klngonyac.      Kaya  windac  mindimoya 

aninama'ta'ku'ka ;     wlnga    omockina'ton    andawat    pindik ; 

agwawat    kaya    agwatcing ;    tasa'kwa'i'ganan    uwlnga    ma- 

mockinaniwan  minilk  nasawat  kingonyan. 

Ningudingdac  klwa11  a'rndawat  mlnawa  Nanabucu  awiya 

20  onondawan      plnondagusinit,       pri'nwanit :       "Ko'koko^o, 

Ko'koko^o !"     Nanabucu    nawatcipinat    klngonya8,    minawa 

aniwucacakucing.        Midac     mlnawa     ani'i'nat     o'kumisan  : 

"No'kumidide,   awiya  ninondawa !" 


I'kitu  mindimoya:    "Anln  anwat?" 
25        Mldac  Nanabucu  ajinabuwat:  "Ko'koko^o,  ko'koko'ho.' 


44 1 

sound.  And  when  on  the  next  day  Nanabushu  went  to 
look  after  his  fish-trap,  he  then  again  heard  the  sound  of 
some  creature.  And  after  flinging  the  fish  towards  the 
place  where  he  heard  the  sound,  he  recalled  what  was 
told  him  by  his  grandmother  on  the  day  before.  He  did 
not  find  it  necessary  to  run  on  his  way  back  home.  And 
so  again,  when  he  went  back,  he  went  and  said  to  his 
grandmother:  "Something  again  I  heard  making  a  noise, 
on  the  ground  was  where  it  sounded." 

o 

Thereupon  he  was  told:  "Why,  a  mink  was  what  your 
uncles  of  old  used  to  call  it.  Did  you  feed  it?" 

"Yes,"  said  Nanabushu. 

"That  was  proper,"  he  was  told  by  his  grandmother, 
"O  my  grandson!"  he  was  told;  "by  many  creatures,  by 
the  little  animal  folk,  shall  we  be  visited,  and  you  shall 
always  give  them  food  to  eat,"  she  said  to  him.  "They 
will  ask  you  to  feed  them,  for  they  themselves  are  also 
anxious  for  food." 

Thereupon  they  say  that  Nanabushu  went  again  to  look 
after  his  fish-trap.  Many  indeed  were  the  fishes  he  slew. 
And  the  old  woman  herself  was  busy  smoking  them  on 
the  rack ;  every  nook  and  corner  inside  of  their  home  she 
filled ;  and  she  also  hung  them  up  out  of  doors ;  quite  full 
were  the  drying-racks  of  all  the  fishes  that  he  had  killed. 

And  once  they  say  that  while  they  were  living  (there), 
again  Nanabushu  heard  something  making  a  noise  as  it 
approached,  as  it  came,  (and)  it  made  the  sound:  "Ko'ko- 
ko'ho,  ko'koko'ho!"  As  Nanabushu  fetched  more  fish,  he 
again  went  slipping  over  the  logs  along  his  course.  And 
so  again  he  went  and  said  to  his  grandmother :  "  O  my 
grandmother !  something  I  heard." 

Said  the  old  woman  :    "  How  did  it  sound  ?" 

And  then  Nanabushu  mocked  the  cry:  "Ko'koko'ho, 
ko'koko'ho !" 


442 

"Ou!"    i'kito    mindamoya.       "Ko'koko'ho    udinawabamn 
kicicanyabanlg.      Acam,"  udinan. 

Mldac    kagat    Nanabucu    aninawatinat   klngonya8 ;    pa'kic 
nanlngickat    sagisit.      Mldac    iwiti    ajipaginat    ka'tani'tank, 
5    "Owa,  nimicomis !"     Mldac  minawa  nayap  ajiklwat. 


Mldac  minawa  weyabaninig  natcipindcibonaganat ;  magwa 
dac  minawa  mamojiginat  klngonyan,  awiya  onondawan 
minawa  nondagusinit.  Midac  minawa  nandutank  Nanabucu, 
"Mna,  mna,  mna!"  ini'tam.  Ml  minawa  ajinawatcipinat 
10  ug!ngon'rma8.  Madclba'tod  minawa  ani'i*nat  o'kumisan : 
"No'kumidide !  awiya  minawa  ninnondawa!" 


"Anln  anwat,   nojis?"  i'kitu. 

tt  lMna,   mna,  mna,'   inwa." 

"Aa,"    i'kitu    rnindimoya ;    "piswaguna    ko'kokoho  udina- 
15   wabanm  kicicanyabanlg.      Wlwlsini.      Awacam,"   udinan. 

Mldec  minawa  Nanabucu  aya'pina'tigu  ani'u'da'pinat 
klngonyan,  paginat  ka'tani'tank.  Mldac  minawa  weyabaninig 
minawa  natcipindcibonaganat.  Minawa  magwa  mociginat 
klngonyan,  minawa  kago  ini'tam.  Nanabucu  kagwanisag 
20  kipagisu  owa  ijipasagipagisu.  Mldac  minawa  nondagusinit 
awiya  inwanit :  "Ha-ha-ha-ha-ha-ha!"  O,  Nanabucu  macl- 
clba'tod !  wawlp  nawatcipinat  uglngon-i!majj.  Klwaba'tod 
inat  o'kumisan :  "No'kumidide !  awiya  nin  nondawa, 
manido !" 


25        "Anln  anwat,  nocis?" 

"  'Ha-ha-ha-ha-ha-ha!'   mrirnwat." 


443 

"Oh!"  said  the  old  woman.  "An  owl  was  what  your 
uncles  of  old  used  to  call  it.  Give  it  food,"  she  said 
to  him. 

And  then  truly  Nanabushu  took  up  some  fish ;  at  the 
same  time  he  was  trembling  with  fear.  And  so  he  flung 

&  o 

them  over  in  the  direction  where  he  had  heard  the  sound. 
"Here,  my  grandfather!"  Thereupon  back  home  again 
he  went. 

And  so  on  the  next  day  he  went  to  look  after  his  fish- 
traps  ;  and  while  he  was  at  work  again  gathering  the  fish, 
he  heard  something  again  uttering  a  sound.  And  now, 
as  Nanabushu  listened  again,  "M,  m,  m  !"  was  the  sound 
he  heard.  Thereupon  again  more  were  the  fish  he  fetched. 
Starting  to  run  again  he  went,  saying  to  his  grandmother: 
"O  my  grandmother!  something  again  do  I  hear." 

"  What  sort  of  a  noise  did  it  make,  my  grandson  ?" 
she  said. 

"  1M,  m,  m!'  was  the  sound  it  made." 

"Why,"  said  the  old  woman-,  "a  fine  soft-feathered  owl 
was  what  your  uncles  of  old  called  it.  It  wants  to  eat. 
Go  feed  it,"  she  said  to  him. 

And  so  again,  as  Nanabushu  with  fear  went  and  took 
some  fish,  he  threw  them  where  he  had  heard  the  sound. 
And  then  on  the  following  morning  again  he  went  to 
look  after  his  fish-trap.  While  gathering  the  fish,  again 
he  heard  another  sound.  Nanabushu  stood  up  with  a 
sudden  start,  and  so  brought  himself  to  his  full  stature. 
And  then  again  he  heard  the  sound  of  some  creature 
screaming  out:  "Ha-ha-ha-ha-ha-ha!"  Oh,  how  Nanabushu 
started  running !  speedily  more  of  his  fish  he  fetched. 
Coming  home  on  the  run,  he  said  to  his  grandmother : 
"O  my  grandmother!  something  do  I  hear,  a  manitou!" 

"How  did  it  sound,   my  grandson?" 

" 'Ha-ha-ha-ha-ha-ha !'   was  the  way  it  sounded." 


444 
"A,  nojis,  ml  tcinibuyang !"  udinan  ojisan. 

"Wawlp,   no'kumis,   ujl'tam,  klgamadcamin !"  udinan. 
Anlc  kaga't  rnindimoya  naningiwizit. 

Mldac  wawlp  caylgwa  wrirmbomat  Nanabucu  o'kumisan. 
5   Midac  anat :    "  1AU,  kiga'irmbomin,"   udinan  o'kumisan. 

Mldac  kaga't. 

Midac  ana't  ojisan:    "Nama'tagumag !" 

"Manu,  gagu  pabamanima'kan !" 

Minawa  mindimoya  i'kito :  "Nojis!  ningackipitagan  nin- 
10  doni'kanan." 

Midac  kaga/t  Nanabucu  ajapagisut,  awinawatinat  o'ku- 
misan  ugaskipitaganini.  Anawi  wmigu  Nanabucu  mlnilk 
wlnigu  kackiwanat  ki'irmbiwana,  mlclac  ima  o'kumisan 
ukitcaya'r  kl-a'sat  o'kumisan.  Midac  klmadciba'tod,  naga- 
15  tcinicindang  upindcibonaganan.  Mlclac  Nanabucu  madcad, 
madcinicimut. 

Mlnangwana  win  ka'i'ji'U'na^kunigavvat  andaswawanagi- 
siwat  mini'kigfu  na'ta'a'mwat  kPsfonvaii,  Midac  kra'nonint 

o  •  o        J   •  • 

ni'tam  kwlngwlci  tci'a'wiku'tasumat  Nanabucon. 

20  Iniwidac  o'kumisan  ugiki'kanimani  awananen  ayawinit, 
midac  Nanabucu  ka'irndcisagisisik. 

Panimadac  minawa  anint  pa'kan  kl'a'nonawag,  kawm 
uglsagimasiwawan  Nanabucon.  Midac  minawa  anint  kra/- 
nonintwa.  Mldac  awa  paji'k  iskwatc  ka'ijat  midac  awa 

25  sigwaniko'ko^o'O'n  kasagimigut  Nanabuco ;  midac  Ini/u 
ka-u-ndcinagadcinicindank  uplndcibonagan.  Mldac  wlnawa 
klmeyawisiwat  anodcigu  aiya'a'wicansag  kiwisiniwat  iman. 


445 

"Why,  my  grandson,  now  are  we  going  to  die!"  she 
said  to  her  grandson. 

"Be  quick,  my  grandmother,  get  ready,  let  us  be  off!" 
he  said  to  her. 

And  then  truly  the  old  woman  trembled  (by  reason  of 
age  and  fear). 

And  so  hastily  was  Nanabushu  now  going  to  carry  his 
grandmother  upon  his  back.  Thereupon  he  said  to  her : 
"Come,  let  me  carry  you  upon  my  back!"  he  said  to  her. 

And  so  that  (was  what)  truly  (happened). 

And  then  she  said  to  her  grandson  :  "Oh,  my  dried  fish!" 

"Never  mind,  don't  bother  about  them!" 

Again  the  old  woman  said:  "O  my  grandson!  my 
tobacco-pouch  am  I  forgetting." 

Thereupon  truly  back  Nanabushu  hurried,  as  he  went 
and  seized  his  grandmother's  tobacco-pouch.  Even  though 
Nanabushu  put  as  much  as  he  could  carry  upon  his  back, 
yet  there  on  the  top  (of  his  burden)  he  placed  his  grand 
mother.  Thereupon  he  started  to  run,  leaving  behind  his 
fish-traps.  Now,  as  Nanabushu  started,  he  began  singing. 

It  so  happened  that  an  agreement  had  been  entered 
into  among  the  various  creatures,  as  many  as  there  were 
that  used  fish  for  food.  Therefore  the  first  one  employed 
to  go  scare  Nanabushu  was  the  Canada  jay. 

Now,  his  grandmother  knew  who  they  were,  and  for 
that  reason  Nanabushu  was  not  frightened  at  first. 

Then  afterwards  some  others  that  were  different  were 
employed,  but  they  did  not  frighten  Nanabushu.  There 
upon  some  others  were  next  employed.  And  the  one 
that  came  last  was  the  screech-owl  by  whom  Nanabushu 
was  frightened ;  and  on  account  of  that  one,  he  left  behind 
his  fish-trap.  Thereupon  all  the  various  little  animal  folk 
enjoyed  the  fruits  of  the  labor  (of  Nanabushu  and  his 
grandmother)  by  eating  the  food  there. 


446 
58.    NANABUSHU    OBSCENELY  JESTS  WITH  HIS  GRANDMOTHER. 

Midac  klwa11  ninguting  Nanabuco  pabimiba'tod,  kawln 
wrka  kibisi'kasl ;  ningutingdac  klwan  anipabimiba'tod  Nana- 
bucti  oganonigon  olkumisan  :  "Nojic,  mwlsaga'arm,"  udigon. 


Nanabuc    kaya  win  i'kito :    "Pa'kadiyamn,"  udinan   o'ku- 
5   misan. 

"Kawln,  nojis,"  udinan,   "niwlmlsl,"  udinan  ojisan. 

"Migu  ima  misln,"  udinan   o'kumisan. 
Amc,    mi    win    kaga't    mindimoya    ajimizlgubanan    ima. 
Midac     minawa     a11    mindimoya    anat    ujicanyan :    "  Nojis !" 
10  udinan,   "tc'iga'kwa  ani'a')^aba'ton.      Niwra-niuda'pinan  wfi- 
kis!ndima-o*yan,w  udigon. 


"Kitoskun  kisindima/u'n,"  udinan  o'ktimisaii.' 

Midac    kaga't    au    mindimoya    ajikisindima-irt    odoskun. 
Midac    minawa    au    mindimoya    anat  ocisan :    "Saga'kwang 
15   ani*i'can ;    nivvra-nikislya'kwisiton    nintoskun,"    udinan    oci- 
canyan. 

Midac  minawa  Nanabucu  anat  o'kumisan:  "Sobandan," 
udinan. 

Amc,  mi  win  minawa  ajisobandank  otoskun,  mldac  au 
20  mindimoya  anat  ocicanyan :  "Nojis!  nawatc  pang!  rku- 
'kwanin." 

"Anic?"  i'kito  Nanabucu. 

"Nlwlskwatciga,"  i'kito  mindimoya. 

Nanabucu  i'kito  :    "Kuntan." 


447 
58.    NANABUSHU   OBSCENELY  JESTS  WITH  HIS  GRANDMOTHER. 

And  now  they  say  that  once  while  Nanabushu  was 
travelling  about  on  the  run,  never  did  he  come  to  a  halt; 
and  once  they  say  that  when  he  was  running  along,  Nana 
bushu  was  addressed  by  his  grandmother  saying :  "  My 
grandson,  I  wish  to  go  out,"  he  was  told. 

And  Nanabushu  in  reply  said:  "Simply  lean  aside  with 
your  buttocks,"  he  said  to  his  grandmother. 

"Nay,  my  grandson,"  she  said  to  him,  "I  have  need 
of  relief,"  she  said  to  her  grandson. 

"Then  do  it  there,"  he  said  to  his  grandmother. 

Well,  it  was  so  that  the  old  woman  relieved  herself  at 
the  time  in  that  position.  And  so  again  the  old  woman 
said  to  her  grandson:  "O  my  grandson!"  she  said  to  him, 
"by  the  edge  of  the  woods  do  pass  along  as  you  run. 
I  wish  to  get  hold  of  something  on  the  way  to  wipe 
myself  at  the  anus,"  he  was  told. 

"With  your  elbow  wipe  your  anus,"  he  said  to  his 
grandmother. 

And  it  was  true  that  the  old  woman  wiped  herself  at 
the  anus  with  her  elbow.  Thereupon  again  the  old  woman 
said  to  her  grandson:  "Into  the  thick  woods  do  you  go; 
for,  as  I  go  I  wish  to  clean  my  elbow  with  the  limbs," 
she  said  to  her  grandson. 

Whereupon  again  Nanabushu  said  to  his  grandmother : 
"Lick  it  with  your  tongue,"  he  said  to  her. 

Well,  it  was  the  same  again,  for  she  licked  her  elbow 
with  her  tongue,  whereupon  the  old  woman  said  to  her 
grandson:  "O  my  grandson!  just  raise  your  head  a  little." 

"Why?"  said   Nanabushu. 

"I  want  to  spit,"  said  the  old  woman. 

Nanabushu  said:    "Swallow  it." 


59-    NANABUSHU  FINDS  CRANBERRIES  AND  BIG  CHERRIES. 

Midac  kaga't  mindimoya  ka'i'jikuntank  usi'kwagan,  mldac 
minawa    klnwan  Nanabucu   anibabimiba'tod  anip'u'k :  wlnga 

•  o  o 

caylgwa  a'pidci  aiya'kusi,   mlgu  ka'i'jipimiba'tod  kljigatinig 

kaya  tibi'katinig.    Ningudingidacigu  anibabimiba'tod  Nana- 

5   bucu    tibi'katiniguban,   mlclac  klnwan  anandank :    "Mimawln 

cayigwa    wasa   tagwicinowanan,"  inandam.      Nawatcidacigu 

anigakipi'tciba'to ;   magwa  dac  pabimusat,  kago  uda'ku'ka- 

tanan,  tibicko  asinPsag.     Mldac  animanak  aji'a'ndotcipitod; 

mldac  ajimi'kotclnang,  uda'pinang.    "No'komis,  naska  kuca 

10  owa!     Wagunan  owa?"  udinan. 


Mldac  mindimoya  oda'pinang.  "Maskigimin  iu,"  udinan; 
"unicicinon  mltcinaniwang,"  udinan.  A'pidci  mamangi- 
minagatiniwan. 

Mldac    minawa  madcawad,  anipabimusat  minawa  Nana- 

15   bucu.   Anidatatagi'kwanit,  kago  ubi'ta'kuskanan  uskljigunk; 

mldec     aji'a'ndotcipitcigat,     mmangwana     minan.        Mldac 

aji'O'da'pinang,  ajiwabanda'a't  o'kumisan,  inat :  "Wagunan 

owa?"  udinan   o'kumisan  wabanda'a't. 


"Ou,  ki'tci'a'sisawaminan,"  udinan.     "Onicicinon  midciga- 
20  tag,"    udigon    o'kumisan.      "Ml  caylgwa  tci'a'niandawaban- 
daman  kadaTndaiyang,"   udigon. 

Mldac  kaga't  Nanabucu  kra'nipagitciwananat  o'kumisan. 
Midac    kru'cigat    Nanabucu    magwa    nangawi    mini'kang, 
anindi    nlbiwa  kago   ni'tawiging  maniwang.      Mri'ma  krir- 
25   nabandank  tcitawat.      Mldac  ima  ka'a'rndawat. 


449 

59-    NANABUSHU  FINDS  CRANBERRIES  AND  BIG  CHERRIES. 

And  so  truly,  after  the  old  woman  had  swallowed  her 
spittle,  then  again  they  say  that  Nanabushu  went  running 
along  at  the  top  of  his  speed ;  ever  so  tired  had  he  now 
become,  for  he  had  been  running  day  and  night.  And 
once  while  Nanabushu  was  running  along,  it  happened  to 
be  in  the  night,  whereupon  it  is  said  that  he  thought : 
"It  is  plain  that  I  must  now  have  come  a  long  way,"  he 
thought.  Slower  then  he  ran  ;  and  while  he  was  walking 
along,  something  he  then  stepped  upon,  it  seemed  like 
pebbles  And  so,  not  making  out  what  they  were,  he 
felt  of  them  ;  and  as  he  felt  of  them,  he  took  them  up. 
"O  my  grandmother,  do  look  at  these!  What  are  these 
things?"  he  said  to  her. 

And  then  the  old  woman  took  them  up.  "Cranberries 
these,"  she  said  to  him.  "Good  are  they  to  eat,"  she  said 
to  him.  Very  large  were  they  in  size. 

Thereupon  again  they  started,  on  his  way  again  went 
Nanabushu  walking.  As  he  went  along  with  his  head 
lifted  up,  something  touched  him  on  the  face ;  and  as  he 
felt  of  them,  they  turned  out  to  be  berries.  And  as  he 
picked  them,  he  showed  them  to  his  grandmother,  saying 
to  her:  "What  are  these  things?"  he  said  to  his  grand 
mother  as  he  showed  them  to  her. 

"Why,  big  cherries,"  she  said  to  him.  "Good  are  they 
to  eat,"  he  was  told  by  his  grandmother.  "Soon  shall  you 
now  look  for  a  place  where  we  are  to  dwell,"  he  was  told. 

And  then  truly  did  Nanabushu  put  his  grandmother 
down  from  off  his  back.  Thereupon  did  Nanabushu  make 
a  camp  in  among  the  sand-berries,  in  where  there  was 
an  abundance  of  various  kinds  of  berries  growing  in  the 
ground.  And  there  he  chose  a  place  for  them  to  live. 
So  there  was  where  they  continued. 

29— -I'UUL.    AMER.    ETIIN.    SOC.    VOL.    VII. 


45° 
6o.  NANABUSHU  is  MADE  TO  FAST  BY  HIS  GRANDMOTHER, 

AND    REVENGES    HlMSELF. 

Ninguding  dac  klwa11  udigon  o'kumisan  :  "Nojis,  kita- 
kri'gwicim  kuca.  Ml  wlnawa  ka/rjitcigawat  kicicayabanlg," 
udinan. 

Mldac  agut :    "Anln  dac  katijicitcigayan,   no^kumis." 

5  "Klgamadca,  nojis,  kawm  dac  klgawlsinizi,"  udigon  o'ku- 
misan.  "A'pldac  winibayan,  nojic,  plpagimicin,"  udigon. 
"Kicpin  dac  tapl'tandaman,  kigaganonin  iman  tclnibayan,'1 
udinan.  "Mlya'tagu  ima  ka'irndciki'kandainan  kaarndcipi- 
madisiyan,"  udigon  o'kumisan. 


10  Midac  kaga't  Nanabucu  weyabaninig  ka'i'jiminigut  olku- 
misan  a'ka^ka^'a  tcimldcit ;  mldac  kaga't  Nanabuc  klmidcit, 
kaya  kima'kadawlnang  pangi  uskljink. 

Anlc  mi  antotamowagubanan  mawija  anicinabag  kri'- 
gwicimowat. 

15  Mldac  klnwan  Nanabucu  madcat  kikicap.  "Anigu'k 
madcan,  kagu  abinabi'kan,"  udigon  o'kumisan.  Mldac 
Nanabucu  aniguck  madcat.  Kabagljik  pabimusa,  kaya 
pabimiba'to  aiya'pl.  Mldac  wunagucininig  a'pidci  aiya/kusi 
kaya  pa'kada.  Minawa  pimusa  uwinga  tibi'katini ;  kawln 

20  owabandanz!n  ajat.  Mldac  kaga'pl  ajiplpagit :  "A'e1,  no- 
'kumis!  mla'pl  oma  tcinibayan !"  Kuma'pl  onondawan 
6lkumisan  na'kvva'tagut :  "E'eM  awas  nawatc  ijan!" 


. 


6o.    NANABUSHU  is  MADE  TO  FAST  BY  HIS  GRANDMOTHER, 

AND    REVENGES    HlMSELF. 

Now,  once  they  say  that  he  was  told  by  his  grand 
mother  :  "My  grandson,  you  should  indeed  go  into  a  fast. 
That  was  what  your  uncles  of  old  used  to  do,"  she  said 
to  him. 

Thereupon  she  was  asked:  "How,  indeed,  shall  I  do  it, 
my  grandmother?" 

"You  shall  go  away,  my  grandson,  and  you  shall  not 
eat  food,"  he  was  told  by  his  grandmother.  "And  when 
you  wish  to  sleep,  my  grandson,  call  for  me,"  he  was 
told.  "And  if  I  think  you  have  gone  far  enough,  then 
will  I  tell  you  to  sleep  there,"  she  said  to  him.  "It  is 
only  by  such  means  that  you  can  know  how  you  are  to 
live  in  the  future,"  he  was  told  by  his  grandmother. 

It  was  true  that  Nanabushu  on  the  morrow  ate  the 
charcoal  that  had  been  given  him  by  his  grandmother  ; 
it  was  true  that  Nanabushu  ate  (it),  and  he  blackened  his 
face  a  little. 

Now,  that  was  what  in  olden  times  the  people  used  to 
do  when  they  fasted. 

Thereupon  they  say  that  Nanabushu  started  out  in  the 
morning.  "With  all  your  speed  go,  (and)  look  not  back," 
he  was  told  by  his  grandmother.  And  so  Nanabushu 
went  with  all  his  speed.  All  day  long  he  went  walking 
about,  and  now  and  then  he  was  running.  Thereupon 
in  the  evening  he  was  very  tired  and  hungry.  Again  he 
walked  till  it  was  growing  thoroughly  dark  ;  he  did  not 
see  whither  he  was  going.  And  then  at  last  he  cried 
aloud:  "Hey-yo,  my  grandmother!  in  this  very  place  will 
I  sleep  !"  After  a  while  he  heard  the  voice  of  his  grand 
mother  answering  in  reply  :  "  Hey  there  !  farther  yet  do 
you  go  !" 


452 

Anlc,  nil  gaga/t ;  Nanabucu  kaga't  ki'tcra'nigu'k  madcl- 
ba'tod.  Mmawa  madclba'tod  a'konamut  minawa  pipagit : 
"No'kumis,  ml  oma  a'pl  tcinibayayan  !"  Caylgwa  minawa 
onontawan :  "E'e^  awas  nawatc  ijan !" 


5  Misa  Nanabucu  minawa  madclba'tod  anigu'k  ki'tcl'a-ya- 
na'konamut ;  wmga  aiya'kusi.  Mldac  minawa  pipagit: 
"Mma  a'pi  oma  tcinibayan?"  udinan  o'kumisan.  Wi'kagu 
oganonigon :  "E'eM  awas  nawatc  ican!" 


Mldac  Nanabucu  nickadisit.  "Anim!  Anin  a'kitut  lasau? 
10  Ningakiwa,"  inandam.  Ki'tci  anigu'k  rnadcat.  Mldac 

wayibagu     pabiga    ugi^kandan    paci/    tagwicing    andawat. 

Mldac  ani'a'yat  owabandan  wasa^kwanamagatinig  wlgiwam. 

Mldac  anandank  Nanabucu:  "Ningaklmosabama,7'  inandam. 

"Wagunan  wandciwasa'kunawat  ?"  Mldac  kaga't  kimotc 
1 5  ajinanzitkang  andawat.  Mldac  ajita'pabandank,  anln  kadi- 

cinawat  o^umisan  !      Owabaman  magwa  aminit  o'kumisan. 

Mldac   ka'i'ci'u'da'pinang  miltigons  paya'tanig  kanwa^wa- 

tinig  kaya,   mldac  ka'ijiba'kindanag  pangi.      Mldac  ka'iji- 

sa'kisitod  ickudank  iu  mi'tig,  midac  ka/ijipiskanag ;  midac 
20  ka'iji-a'gwunang  omicomisan  udiyaning. 


Midac  kai  jisa'kisut  au  alkiwanzi ;  mldac  Nanabucu 
ka'iji'kasut  ingutci ;  midac  nanaga  pimisagltciba'tod  a11 
a'kiwa11]!.  Miclac  Nanabucu  ka-ijinosawabamat  anra-'pa- 
ltonit  ka'a-niwasa'kunanitigu.  Wrkadac  Nanabucu  ki'klwa 


453 

Well,  that  (was  what)  truly  (happened);  Nanabushu 
truly  began  running  at  the  very  top  of  his  speed.  Again 
he  began  running  as  far  as  his  wind  could  hold  out,  when 
again  he  called  aloud:  "My  grandmother,  in  this  very 
place  will  I  sleep  !"  This  time  again  he  heard  her  (say) : 
"Hey  there!  farther  yet  do  you  go!" 

Thereupon  Nanabushu  again  began  running  with  all  his 
speed  just  as  far  as  his  wind  would  let  him  ;  very  tired 
he  became.  And  so  again  came  his  voice  calling  aloud: 
"Shall  I  sleep  in  the  place  right  here?"  he  (thus)  said  to 
his  grandmother.  A  long  while  afterwards  he  was  ad 
dressed  in  the  words:  "Hey  there!  farther  on  shall  you  go!" 

Thereupon  Nanabushu  became  angry.  "  Wretch  (that 
she  is)!  What  is  she  saying?  I  am  going  back,"  he 
(thus)  thought.  At  the  very  top  of  his  speed  he  started. 
And  so  in  a  little  while  he  suddenly  became  aware  that 
close  home  was  he  arriving.  Upon  which  as  he  drew 
near  he  saw  that  the  wigwam  was  all  lighted  up  inside. 
And  then,  thought  Nanabushu:  "I  will  peep  at  her  on 
the  sly,"  he  thought.  "Why  is  she  making  such  a  light?" 
And  so  truly  on  the  sly  did  he  approach  where  they  lived. 
Thereupon  he  peeped  in,,  and  whom  did  he  see  but  his 
grandmother !  He  beheld  his  grandmother  in  the  act'  of 
receiving  amorous  pleasure.  Thereupon,  after  he  had 
picked  up  a  small  stick  that  was  dry  and  long,  he  then 
gently  lifted  the  flap  of  the  doorway.  And  so  after  he 
had  lighted  the  stick  in  the  fire,  it  flamed  up  into  a  blaze; 
whereupon  he  placed  it  against  the  buttocks  of  his  grand 
father. 

Thereupon  was  the  old  man  set  on  fire ;  upon  which 
Nanabushu  concealed  himself  in  a  certain  place ;  and  after 
a  while  out  came  the  poor  old  man  on  the  run.  And 
so  Nanabushu  fixed  his  gaze  upon  him  to  see  in  what 
direction  he  was  running  as  he  went  in  flames.  And  after 


454 

andawat.      Midac  nayagin  aniganonat  o'kumisan :    "No'ko- 
mis,  nintagwicin." 

"Ou,    nojis,"    udigon.      Awidac    mindimoya  anawigu  ogi- 
'kikaniman  ojisan  ka'ijictciganit,  kawlndac  kago  krr'kitusl. 
5   Kaya   iwa  a'pl  kisa'kawat,   kri-'kitu  au  mindimoya:    "Nya, 
ogagwanisagi'a'n  lnix  omicomisan  !"  krr'kitu. 

Midac  kiplndigat  Nanabucu,  kawln  dac  po'tc  kra'camasln 

Nanabucu.      Midac    cigu    ka'i'cikawicimut,    mldac   ka'i'nan- 

dank :    "Magica    kiglcap    ningatacamik    pitcinag,"  inandam 

10  Nanabucu     kigicakidac     udigon:     "Nojis,    kawin    nonguni 

kigatacamisinon.      Kayabi  klgaTgwicim,"   udinan. 


Midac  kaga't   Nanabucu. 

"Paba/a'ntuklwusan,"  udinan.      Udigon  o'kurnisan  :  "Iwiti 
ina'kakaya,   kagux  win  iwiti  ija'kan,"  udinan. 

15  Ina'kaka  Nanabucu  ka'a'ni'i'jiplskwabamat  Ini/u  ka'pimi- 
sagitcisani'pan.  "Anin!"  inandam  Nanabucu.  "Po'tc  nin- 
gatija  iwiti." 

Iwiti  na'patc  inaka'kaya  udininamagon  tci'i'cat. 


"Aye8,"  udinan  o'kumisan.  Midac  kaga't  Nanabucu 
20  ajimadcat  ka-i'ninamagut  o'kumisan.  Midac  anat :  "No- 
'kumis !  kawin  ningatagwijinzl  unagucik  kicpin  kago  ni'to- 
siwan,"  udinan.  "Kagu  kwlnawlbi'i'ci'kan."  Midac  kaga't 
madcat  Nanabucu.  Kuma'pidac  aniyapimicka  ani'i'cat 
ina'ka'kaya  ka'a-ni-i-jiwasa'kunanigiban.  Midac  anibabi- 


455 

a  while  Nanabushu  returned  home.  And  then,  while  out 
side  but  on  the  way  in,  he  spoke  to  his  grandmother, 
saying:  "My  grandmother,  I  have  come  back  home." 

"So  I  see,  my  grandson,"  he  was  told.  And  though 
the  old  woman  knew  what  her  grandson  had  done,  yet 
nothing  did  she  say.  And  at  the  time  when  he  burned 
(the  old  man),  then  said  the  old  woman:  "Pshaw,  he  played 
such  a  mean  trick  upon  his  grandfather!"  she  said. 

And  now  inside  went  Nanabushu,  but  nothing  what 
soever  was  Nanabushu  given  to  eat.  So  then  straight 
to  bed  he  went,  and  this  was  what  he  thought:  "Perhaps 
in  the  morning  she  will  then  feed  me,"  thought  Nana 
bushu.  But  in  the  morning  he  was  told:  "My  grandson, 
not  to-day  will  I  feed  you.  Longer  yet  shall  you  fast,"  she 
said  to  him. 

And  that  truly  (was  what)   Nanabushu  (did). 

"Go  forth  and  hunt  for  game,"  she  said  to  him.  He 
was  told  by  his  grandmother:  "Over  in  that  direction 
yonder,  don't  you  go  over  there,"  she  said  to  him. 

It  was  in  that  direction  that  Nanabushu  saw  him  go  in 
flames  as  he  went  running  out  of  the  camp  at  the  time. 
"Wretch!"  thought  Nanabushu.  "In  spite  of  (what  I  was 
told),  I  will  go  there." 

Over  in  the  opposite  direction  was  he  shown  by  the 
pointing  of  her  finger  where  he  was  to  go. 

"All  right,"  he  said  to  his  grandmother.  Thereupon 
truly  Nanabushu  set  out  in  the  direction  whither  it  had 
been  pointed  out  to  him  by  his  grandmother.  And  then 
he  said  to  her:  "O  my  grandmother!  not  will  I  return  in 
the  eyening  if  I  do  not  kill  anything,"  he  said  to  her. 
"Don't  become  tired  waiting  for  me."  So  then  truly  away 
went  Nanabushu.  Now,  at  a  certain  distance  he  turned 
from  the  course  he  was  bound  into  the  direction  which 
the  other  had  been  seen  going  in  flames.  Thereupon,  as 


456 

musat,  Nanabucu  owabandan  wigiwamans  pada'kitanig  ; 
undaba'tani.  Midac  anicta'pabit  owabaman  cingicininit 
omicomisan.  Winga  klpansowan  ublwayani  pi'kwananing 
ka/rna'kiswadin.  Mldac  anicikanonat :  "  Nimicomis,"  udinan  ; 
"Kibimawatisin." 


"O",   pmdigan,   nojic,"   udigon. 

Mldac  ka'ga't  plndigat  Nanabucu. 

Mldac,  "Namadapin  ima  agametasing,"  udigon  omico 
misan. 

10  Mldac  kaga/t  Nanabucu  plndiga't,  nanamadabit,  pisin- 
dawat  kagikitonit  omicomisan.  Mldac  kinwan  Nanabucu : 
"Kaga'tsa  mwlniba.  Ningakic  kiniba,"  udinan  omicomisan. 

"Niban,  nojis,"  udinan. 

Mldac  kaga't  nibat   Nanabuco  ajikawi'tat ;  kuma'a'piclac 
15   kanibat   Nanabucu   mrajisakinkucikasut.      Mldac,    "E1,   Na 
nabucu,  kuckusin  !"  udigon  omicomisan. 

Mldac  kagact  Nanabucu  unickaba'tod.  Medac  anat  omi 
comisan :  "Nimicomic,  mi  kuca  ki'tci'a-'pwayabandaman," 
udinan. 

20        "Anic,   nojic,   anabandaman  ?"   udinan. 


"Awiya  klnwan  kiplmiganigunanig,  nintanabandam.  Wa- 
wlnga  klnwan  kiki'klwi'taskakunanig  Pwanag.  Sasa'k.wawag 
kaya  nintanabandam.  Mlgu  kaga't  tcinibuyang,  nimicomis." 
Mi  cigwa  Nanabucu  anotc  inanimat  omicomisan  iu  ki'a'ni- 
25  -a'i'kitut.  Mldac  anat:  "NingaTrclta  minotc,  nimicomis; 
mi  nongum  tibi'kalk  tcibimawinauguyank,"  udinan.  Midac 


457 

he  went  walking-  along,  Nanabushu  saw  a  small  wigwam 
that  was  standing ;  smoke  was  rising  from  it.  So  when 
he  peeped  in,  he  saw  his  grandfather  lying  down.  Thor 
oughly  scorched  was  the  fur  upon  his  back,  according  to 
the  way  in  which  he  had  burned  him.  And  so  he  spoke 
to  him  as  he  went  (in):  "My  grandfather,"  he  said  to  him, 
"I  am  come  to  visit  you." 

"Why,   come  in,   my  grandson!"  he  was  told. 

Thereupon   truly  in  went  Nanabushu. 

And  then:  "Sit  down  there  at  the  other  side  of  the 
lire,"  he  was  told  by  his  grandfather. 

And  so  truly  Nanabushu  went  in,  he  sat  down,  (and) 
he  listened  to  the  talk  of  his  grandfather.  And  then  they 
say  that  Nanabushu  (said):  "Verily,  indeed,  am  I  sleepy. 
I  am  going  to  take  a  nap,"  he  said  to  his  grandfather. 

"Go  to  sleep,   my  grandson,"  he  said  to  him. 

And  so  truly  to  sleep  went  Nanabushu  as  he  lay  pros 
trate  ;  and  later  on,  after  he  had  gone  to  sleep,  Nanabushu 
then  pretended  to  be  in  a  nightmare.  So  then:  "Hey, 
Nanabushu,  wake  up!"  he  was  told  by  his  grandfather. 

Thereupon  truly  Nanabushu  leaped  out  of  bed.  And 
then  he  said  to  his  grandfather:  "My  grandfather,  now 
truly  was  I  dreaming  of  a  very  fearful  thing,"  he  said 
to  him. 

"What,  my  grandson,  did  you  dream?"  he  said  to  him. 

"By  somebody  was  I  warned  that  we  would  be  fought 
against,  was  what  I  dreamed.  Completely,  was  I  told, 
have  we  now  been  encircled  about  by  the  Sioux.  And 
they  were  whooping,  such  was  what  I  dreamed.  Therefore 
truly  are  we  destined  to  die,  my  grandfather."  Already 
now  was  Nanabushu  entertaining  all  sorts  of  evil  designs 
upon  his  grandfather,  in  that  he  kept  on  with  talk.  So 
then  he  said  to  him:  "I  will  get  ready,  nevertheless,  my 
grandfather  •  for  on  this  very  night  will  they  come  to 


458 


Nanabucu  kaga't  krircl'tod;  kruji'tod  ubi'kwa'kon.  Midac 
krirji4tod  anln  wa/totwad  omicornisan  wa'i'jisagi'a't.  Midac 
minawa  anadin :  "A'pl  amaniswayang,  notawatwa  awiya 
sasa'kwiiwat,  kagi/  saga'a'nkan.  Nm  ni'tam  ningasagitcisa 
5  tcimlgasoyan,  km  dac  pisan  pmdik  klgataya.  Panimadac 
klgakanonin  tcipisaga'a'man,"  udinan. 


Midac  kaga't. 

Midac    katibi'tatinig    Nanabucu    ka'ijisaga'a'nk.      Midac 

klwi'taiya*!'  kapaba'i'jimaminslsiwit.    Midac  migwanan  ka'i'- 

10  jisasakitclckiwagcimat    kipabata'kinat.      Midac   adank  omo- 

wan :      "Pltabank     tclkaya'r,      mitcisasa'kwayag,"      uditan. 

"Aiyangwam,"  uditan. 


Midac   kiwa11  Nanabucu  ka'i'ciplndigat,   midac   anat  omi 
cornisan:  "  Aiyangwamisin,  nimicomis.    Atcina  klganibamin," 
15   udinan.      "A'tawa-a'n  kaya  ickuta,"  udinan.      Midac  Nana 
bucu    aiya/pl    sasakinguci'kasut.       "Mlgu,    kaga't   kanabatc 
pacux  prai-yawat,  pamawina/u-nangwa,"  udinan  omicomisan. 


Midac    caylgwa    tcigaya*r    weyabaninig,   cayigwa  kaga't 
Nanabucu  omowansan  sasa'kwamagatiniwan. 

20  Midac  wunickaba'tod  Nanabucu.  "On,  nimicomis!  nln 
ni'tam  mngasaga'a'm  !"  Midac  kaga't  Nanabucu  sasa'kwat 
kaya  win.  Midac  ajikanonat  omicomisan,  "  'A'a'11  nimico 
mis,  pisaga-arn  !"  udinan. 


459 

attack  us,"  he  said  to  him.  Thereupon  truly  Nanabushu 
made  preparations ;  he  made  some  arrows.  He  made 
what  he  was  going  to  use  to  scare  his  grandfather. 
And  then  again  he  said  to  him  :  "  When  we  become 
frightened  by  the  threatening  alarm,  when  you  hear  some 
body  whooping,  don't  you  go  outside.  It  will  be  my  place 
to  dash  out  to  the  fight,  and  you  shall  quietly  remain 
inside.  And  after  a  while  I  will  speak  to  you  to  come 
outside,"  he  said  to  him. 

And  so  it  truly  was. 

And  after  it  was  dark,  Nanabushu  went  outside,  where 
upon  all  around  the  place  he  eased  himself,  dropping  the 
dung  here  and  there  a  little  at  a  place.  And  then  all  about 
the  place  he  stuck  some  feathers  which  he  placed  standing 
upon  every  single  dunghill.  Thereupon  he  said  to  his 
dunghills:  "When  it  is  nearly  time  for  the  dawn  to  appear, 
then  shall  all  of  you  whoop,"  he  said  to  them.  "Display 
your  zeal,"  he  said  to  them. 

Thereupon  they  say  that  after  Nanabushu  entered  the 
dwelling,  he  then  said  to  his  grandfather :  "  Be  on  your 
guard,  my  grandfather.  For  a  little  while  shall  we  sleep," 
he  said  to  him.  "Put  out  the  fire,"  he  said  to  him.  And 
so  Nanabushu  now  and  then  pretended  that  he  was  in  a 
nightmare.  "Now,  truly  perhaps  hard  by  are  they  ap 
proaching,  they  who  are  coming  to  attack  us,"  he  said  to 
his  grandfather. 

And  then  was  it  nearly  time  for  the  morrow  to  come, 
already  then,  indeed,  were  all  the  little  dunghills  of  Nana 
bushu  a-whooping. 

Thereupon  up  leaped  Nanabushu  from  his  couch.  "O 
my  grandfather!  it  is  my  place  to  go  outside."  So  then 
truly  did  Nanabushu  also  whoop.  And  then  he  spoke  to 
his  grandfather,  saying:  "All  right,  O  my  grandfather! 
come  on  out!"  he  said  to  him. 


460 

Mldac  kaga't  a11  alkiwanzi  wa*a'ni'rjisaga*a'nk,  midac 
Nanabucu  aja  kra-'kutaskawat  umi'tigwabin  wfpimwat  omi- 
comisan.  Midac  klpimwat  uska'tigwanining.  Ka/ijinisat, 
midac  klmadclpa'kijwat ;  kaya  kipa'kunat.  Pangidac  a'ta 
5  oglmadclton  wiyas  kl'klwawitot.  Midac  anitagwicing  antawat 
o^kumisan  uki'a'nipagitciwanatawan. 


Midac  mindimoya  modcigizit.     Midac  kactina  aji-a'ba'a-nk 
i11    pimiwanan.      A'plidac    wayabandank    wiyas    ugilkandan 
wagunan    tind    wiyas.      Mldac    a'pidci    kaskandank,    kawin 
10  kago  ilkitusl. 

iMldac    Nanabucu:     "Wawlp    klzizan  wiyas.      Niwlwlsin," 
udinan  o'kumisan. 

Midac  kaga/t  gagi'twan  a'l'ndana'kamigisit. 
Midac  kiwlsinit,   o'kumisan  kaya  mldcinit  wiyas.      Midac 
15   klnwan     minawa    Nanabucu    an  at    o'kumisan :     "NVkumis! 
wawip  ujl'tan,   klganingunisumin."   udinan. 

Mldac    kaga/t    ajimadcawat,   kagi'twanigu  a11  mindimoya 
animadca.      Mldac    anici    Nanabuc    nlganlt.      Mldac    anita 
gwicing,  anln  kadijinank  uda'kiwa^ri'mican  klnanawicinon  ! 
20  Nanabucu  win  aja  krklciwani'ka.      Mldac  anat  o'kumisan  : 
"Mlwe  kaya  km  kapamondaman,"  udinan  o'kumisan. 


Ma'kwayanan   minawa  ucigan. 

Mldac     anicimadcat     Nanabucu,      "Ml     ijiwajiwani'kan," 
udinan.      Mldac   Nanabucu   anijimadcat.      "Mldac  kaya  kin 
25   wawip  pimadcan,"  udinan. 

Mldac     a11     mindimoya    kaga/t    ajiwajiwaniikat.       Mldac 
wawabamat    Ini/u   awayanan,   ml  wabamat  mamama'kizunit 


461 

It  was  true  that  when  the  old  man  was  on  his  way  out 
of  doors,  then  indeed  did  Nanabushu  already  have  his 
arrow  on  the  string  ready  to  shoot  his  grandfather.  There 
upon  he  shot  him  in  the  forehead.  After  he  had  slain 
him,  he  then  began  to  cut  him  (at  the  throat  to  bleed 
him)  with  a  knife ;  and  he  skinned  him.  And  only  a  little 
of  the  meat  did  he  take  along  on  his  way  back  home. 
And  so  when  he  arrived  where  he  and  his  grandmother 
lived,  he  then  laid  down  his  pack. 

Thereupon  the  old  woman  was  delighted.  And  so  at 
once  she  untied  the  pack.  And  when  she  saw  the  meat, 
she  knew  what  kind  of  meat  it  was.  Thereupon  very  sad 
she  felt  in  her  mind,  (and)  nothing  had  she  to  say. 

Thereupon  Nanabushu :  "  Make  haste  (and)  cook  the 
meat,  I  want  to  eat,"  he  said  to  his  grandmother. 

And  then  truly  with  reluctance  she  went  about  her  work. 

And  so  he  ate,  and  his  grandmother  too  ate  the  meat. 
And  now  they  say  that  Nanabushu  again  said  to  his  grand 
mother  :  "  O  my  grandmother !  quickly  make  ready,  let  us 
go  after  our  meat,"  he  said  to  her. 

Thereupon  truly  they  set  out,  and  against  her  desire 
the  old  woman  went  along.  And  so  Nanabushu  went  on 
ahead.  And  when  they  arrived  at  the  place,  what  did  she 
see  but  her  dear  old  man  all  cut  up  in  pieces!  Nanabushu 
himself  soon  had  his  pack  all  done  up.  Thereupon  he 
said  to  his  grandmother:  "And  this  do  you  also  carry 
upon  your  back,"  he  said  to  his  grandmother. 

It  was  the  bear-skin  and  the  rump. 

And  then  away  started  Nanabushu.  "Make  your  pack 
of  that,"  he  said  to  her.  And  so  Nanabushu  started  away. 
"And  do  you  also  quickly  come  away,"  he  said  to  her. 

Thereupon  the  old  woman  truly  made  up  her  pack. 
And  as  she  gazed  upon  the  robe,  she  then  saw  that  it 
was  burned  at  the  place  about  the  buttocks;  and  now  the 


462 

udiyawinit    ina'ka'kaya ;    midac    ki'kanimat    au    mindimoya 
kmisimint  unabaman.      Animamawi  kakimotc. 

Kaya  win  dac   Nanabucu,  kawm  udaglpwanawi'tosln  ka- 
'kina  win  tciklpimiwananat  Ini/u  ma'kwan.      Anicagu  wlpa- 
5   'pinanimat    o'kumisan ;    ml   ka'irndcimlnat  tcipimiwinananit 
Ini/u  owayanan.      Amc,  ml  klnwan  Nanabucu  win  aja  pindik 
ayat.      Win   dac  mindimoya  pi'tclnag  anitagwicing.      Midac 
Nanabucu  anat  o^kumisan  :   "Anin  a'pl'tandiyan  ?    Amc  win 
mawija     tagwijinslwan  ?"     udinan     o'kumisan.       "Wagunen 
10  ka-u'ci'toyan  iwiti?     Intigu  kaya  kiglmau  ajinagusiyan,"  udi 
nan   o'kumisan. 


"Ka,"  udigon.  "Misaguna  a'pisi'kayan,"  udig'on  o'kumisan. 

"Wawlp  ujrtan,"  udinan;  "usklyandaginigan,  kaya  kiwi- 

'taiya'r     ickutang     uskipingwi     a'ton,"    udinan    o'kumisan. 

15    "Nlndac  ningamanise.      Agoc  kaya  au  ma'kwayan,"  udinan. 

"  Animi'kwagoc,  mlnawatc  ka/rciminopasut,"  udinan  olkumi- 

san.      Anicagu  wlmrkisumat  o'kumisan,   ml  wandci'i'nat. 


Midac    kaga't  wawip  gagi'twan  ijictcigat  a11  mindimoya. 

Anlcina  atiso'kan,  pabiga  kri  jitciga  ka/rnint.    Midac  minawa 

20  Nanabucu     o'kumisan:      "Midac     ijipodawan,     tclba'kwan," 

udinan.     "Iwe  kapimondaman  mlwe  kagapa'toyan,"  udinan. 


Midac    kaga't    au  mindimoya  ka'i'citcigat  ka'i'gut  ojisan 
Nanabucon.      Midac    sasaga'a'nk  a11   mindimoya  owabaman 


463 

old  woman  knew  that  her  husband  was  slain.  On  the 
way  and  now  and  then  she  wept  in  secret. 

And  as  for  Nanabushu  himself,  he  could  have  found  it 
possible  to  carry  all  the  bear  in  his  pack.  All  he  wanted 
was  to  make  fun  of  his  grandmother ;  that  was  why  he 
gave  her  the  robe  to  carry  in  her  pack.  Well,  then 
they  say  that  Nanabushu  was  soon  inside  the  dwelling. 
And  the  old  woman  too  presently  arrived.  Thereupon 
Nanabushu  said  to  his  grandmother:  "Why  have  you  been 
gone  so  long?  Why  did  you  not  come  long  ago?"  he 
said  to  his  grandmother.  "What  were  you  doing  over 
there  ?  It  seems  as  if  you  have  been  crying  by  the  looks 
of  you,"  he  said  to  his  grandmother. 

"No,"  he  was  told.  "That  is  how  long  it  takes  me  to 
come,"  he  was  told  by  his  grandmother. 

"Make  haste  to  have  (things)  ready,"  he  said  to  her; 
"prepare  a  bed  of  fresh  boughs,  and  round  about  the 
fireplace  lay  some  fresh  sand,"  he  said  to  his  grandmother. 
"And  I  myself  will  go  and  fetch  some  fire-wood.  And 
hang  up  the  bear-skin,"  he  said  to  her.  "Hang  it  up 
with  the  fur  side  towards  you,  much  better  will  it  dry 
that  way,"  he  said  to  his  grandmother.  He  only  wanted 
to  tease  his  grandmother,  for  that  was  why  he  spoke  thus 
to  her. 

Thereupon  truly  in  haste  (and)  against  her  will  did  the 
old  woman  do  it.  According  to  the  story,  straightway  she 
did  what  she  had  been  told.  And  now  again  Nanabushu 
(said)  to  his  grandmother :  "  Now  must  you  build  the  fire, 
(and)  cook  the  meal,"  he  said  to  her.  "That  which  you 
fetched  upon  your  back  the  same  shall  you  boil,"  he  said 
to  her. 

It  was  true  that  the  old  woman  did  what  she  had  been 
told  by  her  grandson  Nanabushu.  And  as  often  as  the 
old  woman  went  out  of  doors  she  saw  her  grandson  making 


464 

ojisan  kago  minawa  ujitonit,  kago  udockutani ;  paga-a-'ku- 
'kwana'tig.  Midac:  "Wawlp,  no'kumis !  kinantawanimin 
oma  pindik  tcipra'yayan." 

A-i'ntaci'taban  agwatcing  a11  mindimoya. 

5  "  1AU,  wawlp  plndigan !  Caylgwa  onsu  kita'ki'k!  Kinan 
tawanimin  dac  tcinimi'kawiyan  oma  tci4kiwiltaiya'r  skutang," 
udinan.  "Pa'kic  klgamamlgwabawana  kita'ki'k,"  udinan. 


Anic,  kagi'twanigu  a11  mindimoya  gaga't  ijictciga  ka'i'gut 
Nanabucon  ojisan. 

10  Midac  mada*a*masut  a11  Nanabucu,  palkic  aiyaprtcinak 
pa'kita-o'wat  Ini/u  a'ki'kon  kamamlgwabowananitcin  olku- 
misan.  Midac  kaga't  au  mindimoya  kiwi'tacagamacimut, 
ayalpi  kaya  mamigwapowanat  lni/u  uta'ki'kon  ;  mldac  win 
Nanabucu  nagamut.  Ka'i'ckwammi'a't  Ini/u  o'kumisan 

15   mri-nat :    "  No'tabowadan  iu  pimide,"  udinan  o'kumisan. 


Midac  kaga't  ki'twan  ijictcigat  mindimoya. 

Midac  klnwan  minawa  anat  o'kumisan:   "Klgi'kandanina, 
no'kumis,  wagunan   madclyan  ?"  udinan  o'kumisan. 

"Kawm,"  i'kito   mindimoya. 

20        uMi    guca    iwa    kinabam    opa'kita'i'gan   madclyan,   ka)rii 
pimide  kanotabowataman,"  udinan  o'kumisan. 

"Nya,  awacima  win!"  i'kitu   mindimoya. 

"Kaga't,"  udinan.  "Klgi'kandan  na  klgri'gwicimun 
kri-ciyamban?  Mlna  oma  a'pl  tcinibayan  kri'ninamban  ? 
25  mlwe  a'pl  klwabaminan  ka-i'citcigayan.  Nlndac  kasa'ka- 
wa'k  kinabam  udiyang,"  udinan  o'kumisan. 


something  else,  for  some  object  was  he  whittling ;  it  was 
a  drum-stick.  Thereupon:  "Be  quick,  O  my  grandmother! 
I  want  you  to  come  in  here  and  remain." 

Busy  at  work  out  of  doors  was  the  old  woman. 

"All  right,  be  quick  (and)  come  inside!"  Already  now 
is  your  kettle  boiling !  And  I  want  you  to  dance  for  me 
round  about  this  fire,"  he  said  to  her.  "At  the  same  time 
I  want  you  now  and  then  to  shake  your  kettle,"  he  said 
to  her. 

Well,  it  was  with  much  reluctance  that  the  old  woman 
truly  did  what  she  was  told  by  Nanabushu  her  grandson. 

Thereupon  did  Nanabushu  begin  to  sing,  at  the  same 
time  now  and  then  he  struck  the  kettle  which  his  grand 
mother  had  shaken  (to  keep  the  meat  from  scorching). 
Thereupon  truly  the  old  woman  danced  round  about  the 
fire,  and  now  and  then  she  shook  her  kettle ;  in  the  mean 
while  Nanabushu  sang.  After  he  had  made  his  grand 
mother  dance,  then  he  said  to  her:  "Lap  off  the  grease 
(from  the  ladle),"  he  said  to  his  grandmother. 

Thereupon  truly  against  her  will  did  the  old  woman 
do  it. 

And  so  they  say  that  again  he  said  to  his  grandmother: 
"Do  you  know,  my  grandmother,  what  you  are  eating?" 
he  said  to  his  grandmother. 

"No,"  said  tl\e  old  woman. 

"It  is  indeed  the  hammer  of  your  husband  that  you  are 
eating,  and  its  grease  is  what  you  are  lapping  with  your 
tongue,"  he  said  to  his  grandmother. 

"Oh,  how  disgusting  you  are!"  said  the  old  woman. 

"It    is    true,"    he  said  to  her.      "Do  you  remember  the 

.time  when  you  bade  me  go  and  fast?     And  when   I  told 

you,   'Is  it  here  that  I  shall  sleep?'  that  was  when   I  saw 

what    you    did.      It    was  I  who  set  fire  to  the  buttocks  of 

your  husband,"  he  said  to  his  grandmother. 

30 — PURL.    AMER.    ETHN.    SOC.    VOL.    VII. 


466 

Amc  na  mindimoya  kagwinawrrnabitigu  •,  kawln  clac 
kago  i'kitusl.  Mldac  Nanabucu  ajiponimat  o'kumisan, 
kaya  win  mindimoya  kawln  kago  i'kitusl. 

6 1 .   NANABUSHU  SWALLOWED  BY  THE  STURGEON. 

Mldac     klnwan     aTndawat    Nanabucu    o'kumisan    kaya. 

5   Ninguting  klnwan  Nanabucu  ajinanagatawandank  inandam : 

"Intigasa  mlgu  nln  ka'i'jipajigowanan,"  inandam  Nanabucu. 

Mldac    anandank :    "  Ningagagwatcima  no'kumis."     Anlcina 

atiso'kan,  mldac  kaga't  anat  o'kumisan  :  "No'kurnis,"  udinan; 

"mlnagu    klnawint   a'tagu  pimatisiyang ?"  udinan.      "Kawln 

10  na    wl'ka    mn    ningru'glsl?"    udinan    o'kumisan.       "Minagu 

ka'ijiplnicipimatisiyan  ?"  uclinan  o'kumisan. 


Wl'ka  dac  oganonigon,  igut :  "Nojis,"  udigon,  "mlsagu 
iu  kaga  kaki'tuyamban.  Namadabin,  naska,  kigawlndamon. 
Pisindawicin  wawani,"  udigon.  "Kaga't  kra'nicinaba'ka ; 

15  mldacigu  kl'a*nitcatcagiunicinowat,  pinic  kaya  wlnawa  !gi/u 
kimgrrgog  katihatwaban  kipajigu  kaya  kisayan,"  udigon. 
"Kaya  win  dac  klwanicin.  Klndac  kaya,  naska  kigawlnda 
mon  ka'irndcimo^inagusiyan  oma  dac  nongum  kra'yayan. 
Awa  kisayan  mra*u  kanigit,  rrwitac  iskwatc  ayamaga'k 

20  anicinabanagitcin  wabinigatadac  iu ;  mldac  ajini'katag  abi- 
notcru-dapi'kwacimun,  ijini'kata.  Mldac  ima  km  wandati- 
siyan,  nocis.  A'p!  kanigit  kisaya11,  mldac  klsagistcigatag 


467 

Naturally  the  old  woman  then  became  restless  where 
she  sat ;  so  she  had  nothing-  to  say.  Thereupon  Nana- 
bushu  ceased  talking  to  his  grandmother,  and  the  old 
woman  too  had  nothing  to  say. 

61.   NANABUSHU  SWALLOWED  BY  THE  STURGEON. l 

And  so  it  is  said  that  Nanabushu  and  his  grandmother 
continued  living  there.  Once  on  a  time  they  say  that 
while  Nanabushu  was  meditating,  he  thought :  "  I  am  curious 

O  '  O 

to  know  if  I  was  the  only  one,"  thought  Nanabushu. 
Thereupon  he  thought:  "I  will  ask  my  grandmother."  So, 
according  to  the  story,  he  then  truly  said  to  his  grand 
mother :  "My  grandmother,"  he  said  to  her,  "is  it  possible 
that  you  and  I  are  the  only  ones  living?"  he  said  to  her. 
"Have  I  never  had  a  mother?"  he  said  to  his  grandmother. 
"Is  it  possible  that  simply  without  cause  I  came  into  being?" 
he  said  to  his  grandmother. 

So  after  a  long  while  he  was  given  reply,  he  was  told  : 
"My  grandson,"  he  was  told,  "it  was  almost  like  that, 
(as  you  will  see  from  what)  I  shall  say.  Be  seated,  listen, 
I  shall  inform  you.  Listen  to  me  with  care,"  he  was  told. 
"Verily,  there  were  some  people  living;  but  then  as  time 
went  on  they  gradually  passed  away  one  by  one,  till  at 
last  also  went  they  whom  you  would  call  your  parents. 
And  there  was  also  one  that  was  your  elder  brother,"  he 
was  told.  "And  he  too  disappeared.  Now  about  you, 
listen,  (and)  I  will  explain  to  you  from  what  source  you 
came,  and  why  now  you  are  here.  After  that  elder  brother 
of  yours  was  born,  then  that  which  is  the  last  to  come 
when  one  is  born  was  thrown  away ;  for  it  is  called  a 
place-for-the-babe-to-rest-its-head,  such  is  its  name.  So  it 
was  from  that  source  that  you  came,  my  grandson.  At 

1   For  other  versions  see  Nos.  7  (p.  49),  28  (p.   207),   29  (p.   215). 


468 

ingutcidac  kra'wra'gotcigata.  Mldac  nagatc  ka'i'cinonta- 
wint  apinodcl  madwamawit  iwiti  agotag  iu  pi'kwacimunans. 
Midac  ka/rcrrcayan,  mldac  ima  klmi'konan.  Midac  nm 
ka'ijini'tawigrrnan,"  udinan.  "Kaya  win  dac  kiga  kisaya11 
5  uglni'tawigi'a*n.  Midac  ajini'kasut  au  kisayan'i'ban  Nana- 
'patam.  Midac  kaya  kin  ka'ijiwlnigoyan  Nanabucu,"  udigdn 
o'kumisan. 


Mldac  Nanabucu  kistcinanagatawantam,  kaskandam  kaya 

mi'kwanimat    nangwana    ki'irsayan-i*t.       Midac    Nanabucu 

10  caylgwa     klvvawanandank     anln    wa'i'citcigat,    mldac    anat 

o'kumisan:    "No'kumis,   mama'kata'kamig  wl'ka  kago  kl'i'- 

cisiwan  iwi  nangwana  ki-i'ciwabisiwangan." 

"  Untcitasa  kawln  kago  kiglwlwlndamansinon,"  udigon 
o'kumisan,  "anica  tcikaskandaman,  kaya  tcigwi'i'nawi'i'n- 
15  andansiyan,"  udigon  d'kumisan.  "Pisanigu  tcipimadisiyan -, 
anicigu  wabandaman  kijik  padciwayasayagin  •,  kaya  caylgwa 
kisis  pamo'ka'a'ngin  aji'o'nanigwandagwa'k,  tci'iji'O'nani- 
gwandaman.  Ml'i/>u  wllka  ka'u'ndcikagcrrnisinowan,"  udigon 
o'kumisan. 


20  Mldac  Nanabucu  caylgwa  inat  o'kumisan :  "No'kumis," 
udinan,  "ninganantupanl.  Ninganantawabamag  awananan 
kanisiguwat  nigrrgog  kaya  nisaya11." 

Mldac  agut  o'kumisan:    "Kagu7,  nojis.      Ingutci  klgatini- 
ga'ton  kl'ya11,"  udigon. 

25        "  Kawln, "    udinan    o'kumisan,    "po'tcigu   ninganantawaba- 


469 

the  time  when  your  elder  brother  was  born,  it  was  then 
taken  somewhere  out  of  doors  and  hung  up.  And  so 
after  a  while  there  was  heard  the  cry  of  a  babe  at  yonder 
place  where  hung  the  little-rest-for-the-head.  Thereupon 
I  went  to  the  place,  and  there  I  found  you.  Therefore 
it  was  I  who  reared  you,"  she  said  to  him.  "And  your 
mother  herself  brought  up  your  elder  brother.  And  the 
name  of  your  elder  brother  was  Nana'patam.  And  so 
the  name  Nanabushu  was  what  you  were  called,"  he  was 
told  by  his  grandmother. 

Thereupon  Nanabushu  seriously  began  pondering,  sad 
too  he  became  at  the  thought  that  forsooth  he  had  an  elder 
brother.  And  then  Nanabushu  straightway  made  up  his  mind 
what  he  would  do,  and  so  he  said  to  his  grandmother :"  My 
grandmother,  it  is  strange  that  never  did  you  say  anything 
to  me  concerning  what  had  actually  happened  to  us." 

"It  was  for  a  purpose  that  I  told  you  of  nothing,"  he 
was  told  by  his  grandmother,  "that  for  no  cause  you 
should  be  sad,  and  that  you  should  not  be  disturbed  in 
your  peace  of  mind,"  he  was  told  by  his  grandmother. 
"And  that  in  peace  you  should  live;  that  you  should 
behold  with  a  feeling  of  contentment  the  light  of  day 
when  it  comes ;  and  that  whenever  the  sun  comes  forth, 
when  a  sense  of  gladness  pervades  all  things,  you  should 
be  joyful  too.  Now,  that  was  why  I  never  imparted  any 
thing  to  you,"  he  was  told  by  his  grandmother. 

Thereupon  Nanabushu  presently  said  to  his  grandmother : 
"My  grandmother,"  he  said  to  her,  "I  am  going  to  war. 
I  am  going  to  seek  those  who  slew  my  parents  and 
my  elder  brother." 

And  then  he  was  told  by  his  grandmother:  "Don't,  my 
grandson.  Somewhere  will  you  bring  ruin  upon  yourself," 
he  was  told. 

"No,"  he  said  to  his  grandmother,  "I  am  determined  to 


470 


mag."  Mldac  ajimadcat  Nanabucu  awipisa'a'nk  wrirji'tod 
pigwa'kon  kaya  sawanan.  Mldac  kinwan  pa'ijiklwat  wayi- 
bagu  mldac  agut  olkumisan  :  "Anln,  nojis?"  udigon. 


"Kawin  kago,"  i'kitu  Nanabucu.  "Kawin  pigwasasinon 
5  niwaga'kwat.  Skuma  sipotcigan,  nolkumis.  Niwlckmiboton 
waga'kwat." 

Mldac  kaga't  a'pagisut  a11  mindimoya,  klskabak  idac 
nani'kibitot  sipotcigan  mlnat. 

Mldac    ajru'ta'pinang    Nanabucu,    mldac  ajimaclcra*sipo- 

10  tcigat.      Mldac    Nanabucu    kuma    a'pl    magwa    asipotcigat 

mmondank  agut:    "Kos,  klga,"  inwawag  sipotcigan.      "Wa- 

gunan  wantcrrkitut?"  inandam.      "Magica  no'kumis  undcita 

niwrr'k  klgagwatcimak,"  inandam.      Minawa  ajimadcipotci- 

gat  ml  minawa  ani^ank  :   "Kos,  kos,  kos,  klga,  klga,  klga." 

1 5   A'pidci   Nanabucu  nickadisi.      "  Nax,   naska  agwiyan   iu  wa- 

ga'kwat!"  udinan   o^umisan. 


"Anica  kuca  kidini'tam  a'pana  iu  ijikijipantaman,"  udinan. 

"Kawin,"  udinan  Nanabucu,  "anicagu  ningagantcigi- 
tamigun."  Mldac  Nanabucu  kaga't  nickadisit.  Mldac 
20  ajru'dakinang  minawa  sipotcigan.  Sipotod  waga'kwat,  mlgu 
minawa  agwut :  "Kos,  kos,  kisayan,  kisayan,"  udigwan. 
Mldac  ajipasiguntcisat ;  mldac  ajinawatcipitod  waga'kwa't ; 
ajiki'tcipapa'kit^wat  asinin  anabitagawaninig. 


47' 

look  for  them."  So  then  off  went  Nanabushu,  he  went 
to  seek  (for  a  small  straight  tree,  easy)  to  split,  to  the  end 
that  he  might  make  some  arrows  and  some  spears.  And 
now  it  is  said  that  on  his  early  return  to  his  home  he 
was  then  told  by  his  grandmother :  "  What  now,  my  grand 
son  ?"  he  was  told. 

"Nothing,"  said  Nanabushu.  "My  axe  does  not  cut. 
Please  let  me  have  the  whetstone,  my  grandmother.  I 
want  to  sharpen  the  axe." 

It  was  true  that  over  leaned  the  old  woman,  and  from 
the  meeting-place  of  the  wall  and  the  ground  she  drew 
forth  a  whetstone  and  gave  it  to  him. 

Whereupon  over  reached  Nanabushu,  taking  it,  and  then 
he  began  the  work  of  sharpening  (the  axe).  And  so  later 
on,  while  Nanabushu  was  at  work  with  the  whetstone,  he 
then  heard  that  which  he  was  told:  "Your  father,  your 
mother,"  was  the  sound  of  the  whetstone.  "Why  does 
it  say  that?"  he  thought.  "Perhaps  my  grandmother  for 
some  reason  is  deceiving  me  about  what  I  had  asked  her," 
he  thought.  Once  more  as  he  began  using  the  whetstone, 
so  again  he  heard  it:  "Your  father,  your  father,  your  father, 
your  mother,  your  mother,  your  mother."  Exceedingly 
angry  was  Nanabushu.  "Hark,  listen  to  what  the  axe  is 
saying  to  me!"  he  said  to  his  grandmother. 

"Simply  are  you  hearing  the  sound  of  what  you  are 
always  revolving  in  your  mind,"  she  said  to  him. 

"No,"  to  her  said  Nanabushu,  "simply  am  I  chided  to 
anger."  Thereupon  Nanabushu  truly  was  angry.  And  so 
he  once  more  took  up  the  whetstone.  While  whetting  the 
axe,  then  again  was  he  told:  "Your  father,  your  father, 
your  elder  brother,  your  elder  brother,"  he  was  told. 
Thereupon  he  leaped  to  his  feet  •  thereupon  he  grabbed 
and  fastened  down  the  axe ;  he  thoroughly  pounded  it  with 
a  stone  right  on  the  sharp  edge. 


472 

Midac  kaga't  ki'tcrujftad  wimadcat;  nlbiwa  ugrirjitonan 
ublgwa'kon  osawanan  kaya.  Anicina  atiso'kan,  kawm 
tibatutcigatasinon  wagunan  kayogwan  krirji'tod  ki'tci  nlbiwa 
ubigwa'kon  kaya  odasawanan,  iu  klklckapitasitod  owaga- 
5  lkwat ;  mlya/tagu  tabatcirnint  kl;kljllta*i'tisut.  Midac  klwan 
Nanabucu  ajimadcat.  Icta,  mlgaya  iwa  anatcimint !  Kl'U'- 
ji'tod  tclman ;  kiwlmbikawat  mi'tigon ;  aniginitigu  ogri'ni- 
ku'kwaton  ina. 

Midac  klmawinawat  micinamagwan.     Midac  klnwan  Nana- 
10  bucu  ajimadcat,  pojo'a't l  c^kumisan.      Midac  kPwa11  agut : 
"  Aiyangwamisin,     nojis,"     udigon ;     "ingutci    klgatinikaton 
klyau,"   udigon  o'kumisan. 


"Kawin,  no'kumis,   ningatagwicin  minawa  oma,"  udinan. 
Misa7    Nanabucu    cayigwa    ajipa'kublnang   utclnan,   madcat 
1 5   kwaya'k  ki'tcimicawagam ;  kaga  dac  nanawagam  tagucing, 
ml  ajiplpagit,   nagamut  : 


"Micinamagwatug,  micinamagwatug, 
Wi'kwanjicin,  wi'kwanjicin !" 

Nagatcigu     cayigwa     matakamiska     ki'tcikami ;     tibicko 
20  pawftig  ajipintciwank,   ml  a'pl^itciwank. 

Midac  kaga't  Nanabucu  anigu'k  nagamut : 

"Micinamagwatug,  wl'kwanjicik ! 

Kmawa  katcaki'a'gwa  nimgri-gog,  kaya  nin  dac  wl'kwanjicik !" 

Pitclnagigu    ka'i*ckwaickitut,    mi  cayigwa  wabamat  mici- 

25   namagwan     wl'kwanigut.       Ni'tamigu    kagicipa'a'botani    iu 

tclman,    midac    anijikuntaya    bosut,    anigumigut    micinama- 


1  Pojo'a't,    "bidding    farewell    to  .  .  .  ,"    a    verb    from    the    French    bon  JOTII-,    and 
used  in  Ojibwa  to  greet  or  to  bid  farewell. 


473 

Thereupon  truly  was  he  fully  prepared  to  go ;  many 
arrows  and  spears  had  he  made.  So  far  as  the  story 
goes,  it  is  not  told  what  he  used  when  he  made  the  great 
number  of  his  arrows  and  spears,  for  he  had  dulled  his 
axe ;  it  is  only  told  of  him  how  that  he  had  made  himself 
prepared.  And  so  it  is  said  that  Nanabushu  started  away. 
By  the  way,  this  too  was  what  was  told  of  him !  He 
made  a  canoe ;  he  hewed  it  out  of  a  log ;  the  measure 
of  himself  was  the  size  he  made  it,  so  it  is  told  of  him. 

Thereupon  he  went  to  assail  the  Great  Sturgeon.  And 
so  they  say  that  Nanabushu  set  out,  bidding  farewell  l 
to  his  grandmother.  And  then  they  say  he  was  told : 
"Be  careful,  my  grandson,"  he  was  told;  "somewhere 
will  you  bring  harm  upon  yourself,"  he  was  told  by  his 
grandmother. 

"No,  my  grandmother,  I  shall  return  again  to  this  place," 
he  said  to  her.  And  as  Nanabushu  now  shoved  his  canoe 
into  the  water,  he  proceeded  straight  out  to  sea ;  and 
when  almost  at  the  middle  part  of  the  sea  he  was  come, 
then  he  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  singing : 

"O  ye  Great  Sturgeons,  O  ye  Great  Sturgeons, 

Come  one  of  you  and  swallow  me,  come  one  of  you  and  swallow  me !" 

And  in  a  little  while  was  the  sea  set  in  motion ;  like 
rapids  when  the  current  is  strong,  so  was  the  flow  of  the 
waves. 

Thereupon  truly   Nanabushu  sang  aloud  : 

"O  ye  Great  Sturgeons,  come  swallow  me ! 

Ye  that  have  slain  my  parents,  come  swallow  me  too!" 

As  soon  as  he  had  finished  speaking,  then  immediately 
he  saw  a  great  sturgeon  coming  to  swallow  him.  At  first 
round  in  a  whirlpool  spun  the  canoe,  and  then  down  into 
the  water  he  was  drawn,  swallowed  by  the  Great  Sturgeon, 


474 

gwan,  kigitclman.  Alpanagu  kiwan  kasaswanik  u'tawagan; 

minawa  mi'kawit,  plndagiya11  klngonyan  aya.      Midac  pisan 

ayat  iwiti ;  mldac  klwan  caylgwa  ki^kanimat  lni/u  klngonyan 
animadclnigut. 

5  Midac  'asa/u  ugimakingon  kiwat  andawat  anamiplg  anawa- 
ya-r  ki'tcigaming.  Midac  kinwan  madwakisttcisagaswa-i'ti- 
wat,  madwakistcikaya  animi'tagusinit ;  mamayawanit  iu 
ki'kumint. 


Ningutingdac  kinwan  magwa  nantutank,  kago  owabandan 
10  Nanabucu  picagiwlnigut.  Anicina  atiso'kan.  Amantc  aji- 
wabigubanan !  Nanabucu  owabandan  klnwan  kago  picagi- 
bitanig,  mlnangwana  a11  micinamagwa  uda  panga'a'ninik. 
Mldac  kinwan  balka  acimamatclt  nani'kinank  udasawan ; 
mldac  ajipa'pacipa'a'nk.  Mldac  klwan  nagatc  nontawat 
15  madwa'i-'kitunit :  "A'ta,  kagatsana  nimacita'a*."  l  Midac 
madwa/rcinantutamawat  wlwan  tcimina'i'gut  kago  ka'u'n- 
dcicigaguwat.  Mldac  cayigwa  anuwfkwutod  tcicicigaguwat, 
kawin  dac  ugaski'tosln.  Midac  madwa*i*lkitut :  "Kawasa, 
Nanabucu  nimani'kag,"  i'kito. 


20  Anawi  kaga't  ki'tci'a'no'kl  Nanabucu  tcicacigaguwanasi- 
wint ;  mi  ka/rjipimida'kwanang  umi'tigwabln,  mldac  Ini/u 
mantcima'kwlt  Nanabucu. 

Mldac    minawa    micinamagwa  a'kitut :    "  Kawasa.      Nima 
ni'kag    Nanabucu, "    i'kitu.      Mldac    waylba  klnibut,  klnisat 

25   Nanabucu.      Anic    anawi    ka'kina    mini'k  wada'towat  klwi- 

1  Nimacita'a-,  "I  am  sick  at  heart,"  perhaps  too  literally  rendered;  "I  am  feeling 
qualmish"  is  nearer  the  sense. 


475 

canoe  and  all.  All  the  while  they  say  there  was  a  hissing- 
sound  in  the  ears  •,  and  when  he  recovered  his  wits,  inside 
of  a  fish  he  was.  Thereupon  quietly  he  remained  there ; 
and  they  say  that  now  he  knew  that  the  fish  was  carrying 
him  away. 

And  so  the  chief  of  fishes  returned  to  the  home  under 
water  on  the  floor  of  the  sea.  And  now  they  say  that 
(Nanabushu)  heard  them  holding  a  great  smoker  among 
themselves,  and  he  also  heard  them  holding  forth  with 
much  talk ;  they  were  giving  thanks  for  that  he  was 
swallowed. 

Now,  once  they  say  that  while  he  was  listening,  some 
thing  Nanabushu  saw  that  caught  his  attention.  Well, 
on  with  the  story.  Wonder  how  he  could  see !  (Never 
theless)  they  say  that  Nanabushu  saw  something  in  motion, 
and  it  happened  to  be  the  heart  of  the  Great  Sturgeon 
that  was  beating.  Thereupon  they  say  that  softly  he 
moved  (and)  pulled  out  a  pointed  arrow ;  and  then  he 
began  pricking  it.  Whereupon  they  say  that  in  a  little 
while  he  heard  the  voice  of  him  saying:  "Oh,  truly  indeed 
but  I  am  feeling  sick  at  heart."  l  And  then  he  heard  him 
asking  his  wife  to  give  him  a  drink  of  something  to  make 
him  vomit.  And  so  presently  did  he  begin  trying  to 
vomit,  but  he  was  not  able  to  do  it.  And  then  he  heard 
him  saying:  "Impossible,  for  Nanabushu  is'  making  me 
sick  at  my  stomach,"  he  said. 

True  was  it,  indeed,  that  hard  worked  Nanabushu  to 
keep  from  being  cast  out ;  so  then  crosswise  he  placed 
his  arrows,  and  so  by  them  he  held  on. 

Thereupon  again  the  Great  Sturgeon  spoke:  "No  hope. 
I  am  in  distress  inside  on  account  of  Nanabushu,"  he  said. 
And  so  in  a  little  while  he  was  dead,  him  had  Nanabushu 
slain.  Even  though  all  that  were  living  there  had  come 


'kundiwag  tciwrpimatcrarwat  otogimamiwan,  anlc  kawin  • 
anlc  awiya  kadicipitnatisit  uda  klpigiska'i'gatanig  ?  Mldac 
ka'irntcinibunit. 

Mldac  win   Nanabucu,   ima  ayat. 

5  Mldac  kaga't  kitcfrcictcigawat  manido'kasuwat.  Anlc 
aja  klnibu  kiltciklngon.  Mldac  kinwan  wa-rjipagidanimawat, 
anawi  kinwanj  ugl'kanawanimawan ;  magica  ta'a'bitclba, 
klinandamog.  Mldac  intawatc  kinwan  caylgwa  pagidani- 
mawat,  nawatc  na'witc  anti  a'pidci  timlyag  ki'tcigami  mrrma 
ip  awipagidanimawat.  A'pidci  ki'tcimanido'kasowag. 


Ka'kina  dac  win  Nanabucu  ugi'kandan  ana'kamigatinig, 
win  dac  kawin  awiya  ugi'kanimigusm  ima  ayat  pimadisit 
kaya.  Ugi'kanimawan  krkumimint,  kawin  dac  win  ugi'k- 
animasiwawan  pimadisinit.  Mldac  ka'i-ckwapagidanimawat, 
15  klpiklwayawanitlwat  minawa.  A'pidci  klpa'taylnowag,  mi- 
ziwa  anigu'kwag  iu  ki'tcigami  krirndciwag  kra'wipagidani- 
mawat  utogimamiwan. 

Mldac  kinwan  win*  Nanabucu  andajiwawanandank  anln 
katijikaski'tod  tcisaga'a'nk  ima  plndcaya-r  klngonying  kaya 
20  klningwa'O'mint.  Mldac  caylgwa  Nanabucu  ki'kandank 
anln  kadodank,  mldac  a'kitut :  "  1AU,  ambasino  tawlkistci- 
•i'jiwabak  wrka  ka'i'jiwabisinuk !"  Mldac  Nanabucu  kisa- 
guswa-a't  nlwing  inaka'kaya  wandabinit  manito6. 


Mldac    klna'kumigut.      Mldac    kaga't    ka*ijikistcinodink, 

25   ka'kina  kago   klpa'kudamika'a'n  ima  klkistcigaming  inama- 

ya-r    a'tagini.      Mldac    kaya    win   Nanabucu,   klmonatawan- 

ga'i'ninig    iima    ayat;   mldac  a11  klngon  ka/i'cru-ki'tciblskat. 


477 

together  by  invitation  for  the  purpose  of  bringing  their 
chief  back  to  life,  [but]  (it  was)  not  (to  be) ;  for  how  could 
any  one  live  with  his  heart  cut  to  pieces?  And  that  was 
why  he  had  died. 

And  as  for  Nanabushu,  there  he  remained. 

Thereupon  truly  they  were  doing  wonderful  things  as 
they  conjured  for  a  miracle.  It  was  no  use,  for  already 
dead  was  the  great  fish.  And  so  it  is  said  that  they  were 
going  to  bury  him,  for  really  a  long  while  had  they  kept 
him ;  perhaps  he  might  come  back  to  life,  they  thought. 
And  so  accordingly  they  say  that  when  they  were  burying 
him,  farther  out  upon  the  sea,  where  it  was  deep,  they  went 
to  bury  him.  Ever  so  mightily  they  conjured  for  a  miracle. 

Now,  Nanabushu  knew  everything  that  was  happening, 
but  yet  by  no  one  was  it  known  that  he  was  there  and 
alive.  They  knew  that  he  had  been  swallowed,  but  yet 
they  did  not  know  that  he  was  alive.  And  so  after  they 
had  finished  burying  (the  chief  of  fishes),  then  back  they 
came  together  to  their  home  again.  Exceedingly  numerous 
they  were,  from  every  part  of  the  sea  had  they  come  to 
be  at  the  burial  of  their  chief. 

In  the  mean  while  they  say  that  Nanabushu  had  been 
thinking  out  a  plan  how  he  might  succeed  in  getting  out 
from  the  inside  of  the  fish  which  now  was  also  lying 
buried.  And  so,  now  that  Nanabushu  knew  what  he  would 
do,  he  thereupon  said:  "Oh,  I  would  that  there  rise  a 
mighty  storm  the  like  of  which  there  has  never  been  before!" 
Whereupon  Nanabushu  made  a  smoke  offering  toward  the 
four  directions  where  sit  the  manitous. 

And  so  his  prayer  was  answered.  Thereupon  truly  there 
rose  a  mighty  wind,  everything  that  was  on  the  floor  of 
the  sea  came  to  the  surface  by  force  of  the  waves.  And 
as  for  Nanabushu,  the  sand  (of  the  mound)  where  he  had 
been  was  washed  away ;  and  then  afterwards  the  fish  came 


478 

Midasugun     kikistcinudin,     mldac     minawa     ka/ijiki'tcra/n- 
wa'tin,   mldac  klmockantcit  au  micinamagwa. 

Midac     ningutingigu     Nanabucu     ayat    ima    anamaya'i- 

klngonying    onondan    kago    a'pitci    mino'tagutinig ;    mldac 

5   ajra/ntutank,    mranitank  :    "(cry   of  gulls)."     A'pidci  mino 

'tagusiwan     awiya ;     mlnangwana     kayaskwag.        "Amba," 

mldac     anandank     Nanabucu,     "ningakanonag,"     inandam. 

Mldac  kaga't  cayigwa  minawa  onondawa8  pldwawinaminit, 

migu    minawa    pa'i'nwanit :    "(cry  of  gulls)."      Mldac  ajika- 

10  nonat :      "let,    niclmisa !  T    skumana    pagwanatciganananda- 

mawiciyu'k  au  k!Dgon!" 

Mldac  kayackwag  ajipasigwa'O'wat,  kaya  aninondagusiwat 

kagwanisaka'kainig  ani'tagusiwat.      Mi  Nanabucu  ka'i'cina- 

watinangin     u'tawagan,     ka'rjiki'pi'tanitisut.       Nagatc    dac 

15    minawa  kra/ndutam,  inlc  minawa  kl'kandnat :   "  1AU,  niclm,2 

pagwanatcigananandamawiciyu'k  a11  klno-on  !"  udinac. 


Midac  kaga't  ajipisanayawat. 

Minawadac  uganonan  :  "PagwanatciganandamawiciyLrk 
a11  k!ngon  !"  uclinan.  "Mackut  klgasasaga-i'ninim." 

20       Midac  kayackwag  ajikanonitiwat :    "Nanabucu  ima  aya." 

Ka'kinaguta  awiya  klki'kanimigon  au  Nanabucu.  Mlc 
minawa  ajikanonat :  "  l  Au,  niclmitug,  pagwanatcigananda- 
mawiciyu'k.  Mackut  klgasasaka'rninim ;  nlgan  wanicicit 
papamisat  klgaticru*nicicrrnim,"  udina8. 

1  Niclmisa,  "O  my  younger  brothers!"  the  ending  -isa  occurs  in  story,  and  usually 
in  the  mouth  of  Nanabushu. 

2  Nicim,  "my  younger  brothers,"  a  vocative  singular  noun  rendered  by  the  plural : 
a  common  construction. 


479 

to  the  surface  of  the  water.  For  ten  days  the  wind  raged, 
and  afterwards  there  was  another  great  calm,  whereupon 
to  the  surface  (came)  the  Great  Sturgeon. 

Now  once,  when  Nanabushu  was  inside  of  the  fish,  he 
heard  something  that  sounded  very  pleasantly;  and  as  he 
listened,  he  then  heard:  "(cry  of  gulls)."  Very  pleasant 
was  the  sound  of  the  creature ;  it  turned  out  to  be  some 
gulls.  "Well,"  thus  thought  Nanabushu,  "I  will  speak  to 
them,"  he  thought.  It  was  true  that  soon  again  he  heard 
the  sound  of  them  coming  hitherward,  whereupon  again 
they  came  with  the  cry:  "(cry  of  gulls)."  And  then  he 
said  to  them  :  "  Hark,  O  my  younger  brothers !  l  Please 
peck  an  opening  for  me  into  the  belly  of  this  fish!" 

Thereupon  the  gulls  flew  up  •,  and  as  they  went,  they 
could  be  heard  uttering  a  frightful  cry,  for  such  was  the 
sound  they  made.  Whereupon  Nanabushu  seized  his  ears 
(and)  closed  them  with  the  hands  (to  keep  from  hearing 
the  din).  And  in  a  little  while  again  he  listened,  where 
upon  again  he  spoke  to  them,  saying:  "O  my  younger 
brothers  ! 3  peck  an  opening  for  me  into  the  belly  of  this 
fish!"  he  said  to  them. 

Thereupon  truly  they  became  silent. 

And  so  again  he  spoke  to  them,  saying:  "Peck  an 
opening  for  me  into  the  belly  of  this  fish!"  he  said  to 
them.  "In  return  I  will  adorn  you." 

Thereupon  the  gulls  spoke  one  with  another,  saying: 
"Nanabushu  is  there." 

Indeed,  by  every  creature  was  Nanabushu  known.  And 
so  again  he  spoke  to  them,  saying:  "Come,  my  younger 
brothers,  peck  an  opening  for  me  into  the  belly  (of  this 
fish).  In  return  I  shall  adorn  you ;  as  beautiful  as  the 
creature  of  the  air  that  surpasses  (all  others  in  beauty)  is 
how  beautiful  I  shall  make  you,"  he  said  to  them. 


480 

"Kawln  kuca   nindakaskra/siwanan,"  udigo8.. 

"  Awa/u"  udina8.      "  Klgakaskra/wa  !" 

Midac  kaga't  ajimadci'tawat  pagwanatciganamawat;  wl'ka 

dac    ogackra/wan.      Midac   Nanabucu  ka*rjisagitdtat,   kaya 

5   isagitci  tabatank  utciman  mi'tigon  kawlmbigawa'pan.  Midac 

pitclnag    wawani    wabamat    lni/u  micinamagwan  kagumigut 

anigininit ;  intigu  minis  agundak  ajinagusinit  agwantcininit. 

Midac  ka'i'ji'u'da'pinat  pajik  !ni/u  kayackwan  ;  midac  ka*i-ji- 

wawacra't.     Midac  ka'i'ciwapicki'a't,  tibicko  koning  klcra't. 

10   Midac    ka'i'nat :    "Kin  win  kayask  kigatani'i-jiwlnigo  tci'a-- 

nia'klwang." 


Midac    kaga't    kistciminwandank    wabandisut    au  kayask 
ajiwunicicit. 

" 'Au,"  udinan,    "midac  ijipazigirryu'k." 

15  Midac  anicina  atiso'kan,  miya'tagu  paji'k  tagimimint 
kru'da'pinat  kayackwan.  Midac  a'potc  ka*ijiTrnicicivvat 
ka'kina  mini'k  a'pl  ka'kina  pasigo'O'wat.  Midac  Nanabucu 
ka'rjimadci'tat  klpigickicwat  Ini/u  klngonyari.  Midac  a'pl 
ka*i*ckwananawijwat,  ml  kri^kitut  kaya  pa'kic  kiziswawa- 

20  binat :  "Klngon  klgatanijiwmigom  tci'a-ni-a-'klwang.  Klga- 
tamuguwak  kaya  anicinabag  tcra-nra^kiwang.  -  -  Kin  dac," 
udinan  micinamagwan:  "Kawin  minawa  wi'ka  klgatiniginisl 
tcianra^klwang,  kawln  awiya  tapimadisisl,"  udinan.  Midac 
kaga't  ka'ijiwabatinig  klngonyansas  ki'tcinlbiwa  krirndci- 

25    Trci'a't  ima  micinamagwang. 


Midac    Nanabucu    ajikiwa-u't    nantawabamat    o'kumisan. 
Anitagwicingidac    omi'kawan    o'kumisan    a'pidci    kawanda- 


"We  surely  could  not  (make  an  opening  into)  him,"  he 
was  told. 

"Yea,   (you  can)!"  he  said  to  them.      "You  can  do  it!" 

Thereupon  truly  they  began  pecking  an  opening  into 
(the  fish) ;  and  after  a  long  while  they  succeeded.  And 
then  afterwards  Nanabushu  crawled  out,  and  he  drew  out 
his  canoe  which  he  had  hewn  from  a  log.  And  then  was 
the  time  that  he  took  a  careful  look  to  see  how  big  was 
the  great  sturgeon  which  had  swallowed  him ;  like  an 
island  afloat  upon  the  water  was  how  it  looked  as  it  lay 
upon  the  deep.  Thereupon  he  took  up  one  of  the  gulls 
in  his  hands ;  and  then  he  adorned  it.  And  then  he 
whitened  it,  (white)  like  snow  he  made  it.  Thereupon  he 
said  to  it :  "  You  shall  be  called  a  gull  from  now  till  the 
end  of  time." 

It  was  true  that  exceedingly  happy  was  the  gull  when 
it  looked  upon  itself  and  saw  how  beautiful  it  was. 

"Now,  then,"  he  said  to  them,    "now  fly  away!" 

Now,  according  to  the  story,  there  was  mentioned  but 
a  single  gull  that  he  took  up  in  his  hands.  Yet  never 
theless  just  as  beautiful  were  all  the  rest  when  they  all 
started  to  fly  away.  And  then  afterwards  Nanabushu 
began  cutting  up  the  fish  with  a  knife.  And  so  when  he 
had  finished  cutting  it  up,  then  he  said,  at  the  same  time 
that  he  was  flinging  the  pieces  in  every  direction:  "Fishes 
shall  you  be  called  till  the  end  of  time.  And  you  shall 
be  eaten  by  the  people  till  the  end  of  the  world.  -  -  And 
you,"  he  said  to  the  Great  Sturgeon,  "never  again  so 
large  shall  you  be  as  long  as  the  world  lasts,  else  nobody 
would  ever  live,"  he  said  to  him.  Therefore  it  truly  came 
to  pass  that  he  created  little  fishes  in  great  numbers  from 
that  Great  Sturgeon. 

Thereupon  Nanabushu  paddled  home  in  his  canoe  to 
find  his  grandmother.  And  when  he  got  there,  he  dis- 

3! — PUBL.    AMER.    ETHN.    SOC.    VOL.    VII. 


482 

minit.      Mldac    anijita'pabit,    mic    anat:     "No'kumis,    ninta- 
gwicin,"  udinan. 

"A1,  wagutugwansa  pana  wandclciwagwanu'ku,  aya  avva- 
cansag !" 

5  "Kawln,  no'kumis.  Nm  kuca,  Nanabucu,  kojis,  patag- 
wicin."  Midac  anijiplndigat.  Mldac  owabamat  o'kumisan 
agawa  onsabinit,  a^pana'I'dug  klmawinit.  Mldac  Nanabucu 
a'pidci  cawanimat  o'kumisan.  Mldac  nawatc  ka'iji'a'n- 
tci'u-skinlgi'a-t. 


62.    NANABUSHU  SLAYS  HEWER-OF-HIS-SHIN. 


10 

ojicayan. 


Midac  awe  mindirnoya  ki'tciminwandank  wabamat  minawa 
wjicayan.  Kawm  dac  wmigu  ugi'kandanzm  pangi  nawatc 
kra'ndci'u'skinlgiint.  Mldac  anat  ojisan :  "Pana  awiya 
ninglpi'U'disigok ;  ijiwat  kinisigoyan.  Minawa  anint  intigog, 
'No'kumis,  nintagwicin,'  undcita  pljiwat,"  udinan  ojisan. 


1 5  Midac  Nanabucu  niskadisit,  midac  anat  o'kumisan : 
"Kayabi  klganaganin.  Kawln  maci  nimi'kawasl  awananltug 
tcagi'a'gwan  ningitislrnag." 


"A1!  nojic,"  udinan,  "klglkitimagis.  Kawln  kitakaski'o'sl 
tcri'jayan  iwiti  ayat  a11  kaklwuci'i-'k,"  udinan. 

20        "Antic  ayat?" 

"Mrrwiti  ayamaga'k  nawayaT  kistcikistcigamlnk  pajikk 
minis.  Kawindac  wi'ka  awiya  ijasl  iwiti.  Migu  apisi'kat 
awiya  acatcin.  Kawindac  ki'kand^zln  amantc  tcitagwici- 


covered  his  grandmother  grievously  sad  in  her  thoughts. 
And  as  he  peeped  into  the  lodge,  he  said  to  her:  UO  my 
grandmother !  I  have  now  come  home,"  he  said  to  her. 

"Oh,  I  should  like  to  know  why  they  continually  say 
this  to  me,  these  little  animal-folk!" 

"Nay,  my  grandmother.  It  is  really  myself,  Nanabushu, 
your  grandson,  who  has  now  come  home."  And  then 
into  the  lodge  he  went.  Thereupon  he  saw  that  his  grand 
mother  was  barely  able  to  see,  (showing)  that  perhaps  all 
the  while  she  had  been  weeping.  And  then  afterwards 

he  had  made  her  younger. 

i 

« 

62.   NANABUSHU  SLAYS  HEWER-OF-HIS-SHIN. 

Thereupon  the  old  woman  was  very  happy  to  see  her 
grandson  once  more.  And  not  at  all  did  she  realize  that 
she  had  been  made  younger.  So  then  she  said  to  her 
grandson:  "All  the  time  some  creatures  came  to  me  here; 
they  told  me  that  you  were  slain.  Again  by  some  would 
I  be  told,  'O  my  grandmother!  I  have  come  home.' 
With  some  design  they  came  speaking  thus  to  me,"  she 
said  to  her  grandson. 

Thereupon  Nanabushu  was  angry,  and  he  said  to  his 
grandmother:  "Again  shall  I  leave  you.  Not  yet  have 
I  found  the  probable  ones  that  must  have  slain  all  my 
relatives." 

"Alas!  my  grandson,"  she  said  to  him,  "you  are  to 
be  pitied.  You  may  not  be  able  to  go  there  where  abides 
the  one  who  made  you  an  orphan,"  she  said  to  him. 

"And  where  is  it?" 

"At  yonder  place  in  the  centre  of  the  great  sea  is  an 
island.  And  never  has  any  one  gone  there.  And  he 
goes  for  good  whoever  goes  there.  I  don't  know  whether 


484 

nowagwan  iwiti,  kunima  gaya  nowanda  nibowagwan,"  udigon 
o'kumisan.  "  Midac  iwiti  ayat  a  manido ;  ajini'kasut  Katcl- 
kika'arnk-uka'kwan,  mra*nint  mi  a'pana  ajitcigika*a'nk  iu 
uga'kawan,  ina.  Klcpin  awiya  ijat  iwiti  ayabi'ta  iji'a'wang 
5  mitabwawa-a-ng  uga'kwan,"  udinan. 


"On!"  udigon  ojisan.  Mldac  kaga't  kicandank  Nanabucu, 
inandam  wrijat.  Mldac  anat  o'kumisan  :  "Po'tc  ningana- 
tawabama,"  udinan.  Mldac  Nanabucu  minawa  ka'i'ji'ujrtad 
minawa  kru*ci'tod  usawanan,  nisugun  minilk  tci'a'batci'tod 

10  ugrrjruji'tonan.  Mldac  ka'kici'tpd  minawa  Nanabucu 
mamadasitot  utclmanic.  Mldac  madcat  Nanabucu  kwaya'k 
ka*i*ninamagut  o'kumisan.  Ninguting  dac  klwan  Nanabucu 
anibabimiskat,  cigwa  kaga't  kago  onondam  kwaya'k  iijat. 
Aji'agwamut  andutang ;  cigwa  kaga't  onondan.'  "Ta11  tan," 

15  ini'tam.  Mlc  anandank :  "Nax!  mri'we  no'kumis  ka/ijit," 
inandam.  Mldac  kagalt  madcat  anigu'k.  Nanabucu  ku- 
malpi  minawa  nanductam  cigwa  minawa  onontam.  "Twan 
twan,  tvvan,"  ;  ini'tam.  Nawatc  pacutagwatini.  Minawa 
madcat  anigu'k. 


20  Ningutingigu  minawa  anra-yinabit,  kago  owabandan  uni- 
ganimi ;  intigu  kago  pamipacibri'gatag ;  midac  aylnabit, 
"  Mimawin  48i/u  caylgwa  tayabinagwa'k  minis  ajayan," 
inandam.  Midac  kaga't  anigu'k  pimiskat.  Kuma'pidac 


1  Uttered  with  a  slow,  deep,  nasal   voice. 


they  have  ever  arrived  at  the  place,  or  if  they  died  on 
the  way,"  he  was  (thus)  told  by  his  grandmother.  "And 
over  there  is  a  manitou  ;  he  is  called  Hews-upon-his-Shin, 
for  it  is  said  of  him  that  ever  is  he  hewing  upon  his  shin. 
It  is  said  of  him  that  if  any  one  should  go  thither,  then 
at  half  way  to  the  place  would  one  hear  the  sound  he 
makes  upon  his  shin,"  she  said  to  him. 

"Really!"  was  she  told  by  her  grandson.  Thereupon 
in  truth  did  Nanabushu  make  up  his  mind,  he  thought 
that  he  would  go.  And  so  he  said  to  his  grandmother : 
"Determined  am  I  to  go  look  for  him,"  he  said  to  her. 
Thereupon  Nanabushu  again  made  ready  by  making  spear- 
pointed  arrows,  enough  to  last  him  three  days  was  the 
number  he  made.  And  so  after  he  had  finished  them, 
then  again  Nanabushu  put  his  canoe  in  order.  And  then 
away  went  Nanabushu  straight  towards  where  it  had  been 
pointed  out  to  him  by  his  grandmother.  Now,  by  and 
by,  they  say,  as  Nanabushu  went  paddling  along  (in  his 
canoe),  presently  something  he  truly  heard  straight  (on  the 
way)  whither  he  was  going.  He  let  his  canoe  go  floating 
quietly  along  upon  the  water  while  he  listened  to  the 
sound-,  presently  he  clearly  heard  a  sound.  "Tan,  tan,"  l 
(such)  was  the  sound  he  heard.  Thereupon  he  thought : 
"Hark!  that  is  what  my  grandmother  told  me,"  he  thought. 
And  so  truly  he  hurried  on.  Nanabushu  later  on  again 
listened  for  the  sound,  presently  again  he  heard  it.  "Twan, 
twan,  twan,"  l  was  what  he  heard.  Nearer  it  now  sounded. 
Again  he  hastened  on. 

Another  time,  as  he  was  looking  about,  he  saw  some 
thing  in  the  way  ahead  of  him ;  it  was  an  object  like  a 
line  drawn  across  his  course;  and  then,  as  he  looked, 
"Perhaps  that  which  is  now  coming  into  view  is  the  island 
for  which  I  am  bound,"  he  thought.  Thereupon  he  truly 
hastened  on  with  his  canoe.  Farther  on  he  listened  again 


486 

minawa  andu'tam,  migayapi  ani'tang.  "Twin  t\yin," L  ini'tam. 
Mri'ma  gwaya'k  andanitang  pimidepinagwatinig  a'ki. 
Mlnangwana  kaga't  iu  ka/rjinang.  Midac  minawa  madcat, 
caylgwa  owabandan  wawani  alki ;  mldac  minawa  aji'a'ndu- 
5  tank,  ml  minawa  nondank.  "Twi11  twin,"  ini'tam.  Mlgu 
ajikuckwagamisag  nibi  apitcikiciwaganadank  iu  uga'kwan 
au  manido. 


Mldac  kiwan  Nanabucu  caylgwa  anitcagisat  ima  kwaya'k 
andani'tank ;  kaga't  anigabat  owabandan  undamuninik  mi- 

10  lkana.  Mldac  anijiku'pa'a'tod,  owabandan  wlgiwamans 
pata'kitanig  -,  mldac  klmotc  anijinansickang ;  anijita'paban- 
dank,  owabaman  a'kiw^zlyan  nananganasamapinit,  mldac 
ta'kunaminit  kago.  Mldac  ajiwabamat  pa'ki'ta'a/minit 
uga'kwan,  tibicko  tclgiga-i-gangs  mra'ndotank.  Gagwani- 

1 5  saka'kamig  dac  apl'twawakanandank.  Mldac  win  Nanabucu, 
ima  nibawit  kanawabamat. 


Kuma'pidac    pigwa'kitawan    mldac    agut :  2    "  A-a-a    laa, 
Nanabucu!   kipinantupanltawina?"  udigon. 

"Ayes,"  udinan  Nanabucu. 

20        "Awawasa!"      Pa'kic    palpilkasut,    apltcimanimat    Nana- 
bucon ;   kawin  klwatandanzl  tcicagotci'a't. 

Midac  kaya  win  Nanabucu,   "  'A'a/u,  wawlp!" 

Mldac  kaga't  plwananglt,   pipasigwit  kaya ;  midac  ajipi- 


1  Uttered  with  a  slow  deep  nasal  voice. 

2  Kumatpidac    pigwa'kitawan  midac  agut,   "after  a   while  the  other  turned  about 


for  the  souad,  and  he  heard  it  the  same  as  before.  "Twi11, 
twi","1  was  the  sound  he  heard.  Straight  from  yonder  place 
where  the  land  was  coming  into  view  he  heard  the  sound. 
It  turned  out  truly  to  be  (the  island)  that  he  had  seen. 
And  now,  as  he  continued  on,  he  presently  saw  the  land 
in  plain  sight ;  thereupon  again  he  listened,  and  then  again 
he  heard  the  sound.  "Twin,  twin," l  was  what  he  heard. 
And  then  the  water  trembled,  so  loud  was  the  manitou 
hewing  upon  his  shin. 

Thereupon  it  is  said  that  Nanabushu  now  drove  his 
canoe  straight  for  the  place  in  the  shore  from  whence  he 
heard  the  sound  come ;  truly  as  he  went  ashore  he  saw 
a  path  leading  away  somewhere.  And  as  he  followed  it 
up  from  the  shore,  he  saw  a  small  wigwam  standing ;  and 
so  secretly  went  he  up  to  it;  as  he  peeped  in,  he  saw  an 
old  man  seated  in  a  squatting  pose,  facing  him,  and  he 
had  hold  of  something  in  his  hand.  And  as  he  watched 
him  striking  upon  his  shin,  it  was  like  hewing  upon  a  log, 
such  was  his  manner  of  doing  it.  And  frightful  was  the 
sound  that  he  made  when  he  struck.  And  as  for  Nana 
bushu,  there  he  stood  observing  him. 

After  a  while  the  other  then  turned  about,  and  said :  2 
"Aha,  aha,  aha,  Nanabushu!  Have  you  come  to  make 
war  upon  me?"  he  was  told. 

"Yes,"  to  him  said  Nanabushu. 

"Very  well,  then  !"  At  the  same  time  he  made  a  pretence 
at  laughing,  so  deep  was  his  contempt  of  Nanabushu ;  he 
had  no  doubt  but  that  he  would  prevail  over  him. 

And  as  for  Nanabushu,  too,    "Come,   make  haste!" 

And  so,  in  truth,  up  he  slowly  rose  from  his  couch,  and 
up  he  rose  to  his  feet ;  and  then  he  came  out  of  doors. 

and  said."  This  is  a  very  free  rendering.  A  closer  translation  would  be:  "After  a 
certain  length  of  time  by  the  one  that  turned  about  and  looked  up  at  him,  he 
was  told"  .  .  . 


488 

saga-a-nk.      "Amc,    klga'O'nabandamin    kadajiku'tadiyang," 
udigon. 

a4A'aV  udinan. 

Midac  kaga't  wawanabandamowad.  "Mro'ma,"  i'kitowag. 
5  A'i'nabi  Tcagaka'a'nk-uga'kwan.  Tatataganabit  kaya  win 
Nanabucu ;  kru'wanigabawi,  udacwlwin  ta'kunam,  mi'tigwa- 
bm  kaya.  Win  dac  Tcagaka'a'nk-uga'kwan,  uda'kunan 
asinm  pagamagan.  Midac  cigwa  kanonitiwat,  atAu!"  Dac 
kaga't  Nanabucu  kaya  win  u'pimwan,  kaya  win  dac  Tca- 

10  gaka'a-nk-uga'kwan  pa'kita°wan  upagamigan.  Midac  kagii't 
ki'tciudcanimri'tiwat.  Nanabucu  kagagu  miya'ta  anano'ki't 
tabazit,  kaga't  udotcanimrrgdn.  Midac  kaya  win  Nana 
bucu,  papimwutcigat.  Magwa  dac  cigwa  ki'tci  pa'pinlku- 
'tatiwat,  kaya  win  Nanabucu  caylgwa  agansinadiniwan 

15  udasawanan.  Magwasagu  Nanabucu  awiya  onondawan 
pipagimigut  icpiming  ina'kakeya,  igut :  "  'E1,  Nanabucu, 
udcickipunwaning  pimwi!"  ini'tam  Nanabucu.  Nana'kawec 
pipagi  kaya  win:  "Wan!"  i'kitu  Nanabucu. 


"Udcickipunwaning  pimwi!" 

20        Midac  agut  Tcagaka-a-minit-uga'kwan  :  "  Anln,  Nanabucu? 
Awanan  kanonat?"   udigon. 

Nanabucu  dac  ickitu  :  "  A-a-a-e1,  agansmawagna  nicPmayag 
kljigunk  sayasldwabamiwat  ?"  udinan.  Midac  kaga't  Nana 
bucu  ajipimwat  mi/u  Tcagaka'afminit-uga'kwan  ima  ka*i-nint 
25  tcipimwat,  anza'pitanig  upi'kwanang  winisisan ;  mldac  aji- 
mijwat.  Midac  agut:  "Wa,  Nanabucu,  mmangwana  kin 
kaga't  wmiciyan?"  udigon. 


489 

"Well,  let  us  pick  out  a  place  where  we  are  to  fight  each 
other,"  (Nanabushu)  was  told. 

"All  right,"  he  said  to  him. 

Thereupon  they  truly  sought  for  a  place.  "Here  is  a 
place,"  they  said.  Round  about  looked  Hewer-of-his-Shin. 
And  up  into  the  air  looked  Nanabushu  ;  he  stood  in  his 
place,  his  shield  he  carried,  so  too  his  bow  and  arrows. 
And  as  for  Hewer-of-his-Shin,  he  held  in  his  hand  a  war- 
club  of  stone.  Thereupon  they  now  addressed  each  other, 
saying:  "Ready!"  And  truly  Nanabushu  then  shot  at  him, 
and  then  in  turn  Hewer-of-his-Shin  struck  him  with  his 
war-club.  Thereupon  exceedingly  hard  at  work  they  truly 
kept  each  other.  Nanabushu  nearly  all  the  while  was 
occupied  in  dodging  the  blows,  truly  was  he  kept  stirring 
by  the  other.  And  as  for  Nanabushu,  he  too  was  active 
with  his  shooting.  While  they  now  were  in  the  thick  of 
their  fight  with  each  other,  then  the  supply  of  Nanabushu's 
pointed  arrows  began  to  run  low.  And  in  the  midst  (of 
the  fighting)  Nanabushu  heard  the  sound  of  some  one 
calling  out  to  him  from  above,  saying:  "Hey,  Nanabushu! 
at  the  scalp-lock  shoot  him !"  was  the  sound  Nanabushu 
heard.  Though  busily  engaged,  out  he  also  cried  :  "What!" 
said  Nanabushu. 

"At  his  scalp-lock  shoot  him!" 

Whereupon  he  was  told  by  Hewer-of-his-Shin :  "  What 
(is  the  matter),  Nanabushu?  With  whom  are  you  speaking?" 
he  was  asked. 

Nanabushu  then  said:  "Ah,  few  do  you  think  are  my 
little  brothers  of  the  sky  who  protect  me?"  he  said  to  him. 
Thereupon  truly  Nanabushu  shot  the  Hewer-of-his-Shin  there 
where  he  was  told  to  shoot  him,  there  where  his  hair  was 
tied  in  a  bunch  at  the  back  •,  whereupon  he  hit  him  (with 
the  arrow).  And  then  he  was  told:  "Alas,  O  Nanabushu ! 
is  it  true  that  now  you  really  intend  to  kill  me?"  he  was  told. 


4QO 

"  An-an-an-an-an  !"  udinan.  "Minanga  kipapa'pinrrn  !"  1 
udinan  Nanabucu.  Minawa  pimwadin  udcickibanwanining. 
Mlcru  minawa  nasab  asfiit :  "Wa,  Nanabucu!  minan^wana 

o  o  •      o 

klnigu  kaga't  wlniciyan?"   udinan. 


5  "Mlnanga'ka!"  i'kito  Nanabucu.  "Km  kanisadwa  mgl- 
•i'gog,"  udinan,  "kaya  km  dac  kiwmisin!"  udinan.  Pa'kic 
Nanabucu  a^rndanwawa'to  kaya  bapimwutcigat.  Midac 
cayigwa  kawinawat.  Midac  agut  minawa:  "Ml,  Nanabucu, 
ijiponrrcin  !  Maskut  kago  klgamlnin." 


10  "Wawip  micin!"  udinan.  "  Windamawicin  kaya  anmcli 
katotawatwa  nos  ninga  kaya  ga'kina  kaya  pamadisiwa'pan  !" 
udinan.  Midac  kaga't  agut:  "Kiwabandan  na  owa  nongun 
andaclku'tadiyang  mimis?  Ingiwidac  mi'tigog  wayabamatwa 
pata'kisuwat  mi'i'gi/u  pamadisiwa'pan.  Midac  iwe  ka/rci- 

15  >73Lgw^  tcimi'tigfri'wat,"  udigon.  "Klcpin  dac  poni'i-yan, 
klgamlnin  kadabatci'toyan  tciabitciba'a'wa,"  udigon. 


"Wawip  Windamawicin  anln  katotaman  tcra-bitciba*i'- 
wayan." 

"Ima    ijan    pindik    kapi'u'ndcipasigwlyan,   klgawabandan 
20  ima  mi'tiguma^ka'kons  •,  pidon   dac  oman." 

Midac  kaga't  Nanabucu  nanzitkank ;  kawin  kaya  upagi- 
tinasln  umi'tigwabln.  Midac  agut:  "Kiwabandan  o  a'tag 
oman  ma'ka'konsing,  mi'tiguma'ka'tonsing ;  mi  oman  a'tag 

1  Minanga  kipapa'pinH-n !     "You  surely  do  not  think  that  I  am  merely  trifling 
with    you!"      More    literally:   "Why,  of  course  I  am  making  fun  of  you!"     But  the 
sense  is  better  with  the  freer  rendering. 


491 

"Ah!"  he  said  to  him.  "You  surely  do  not  think  that 
I  am  simply  trifling  with  you  !"  l  to  him  said  Nanabushu. 
Once  more  he  shot  him  in  the  crown  of  the  head.  Where 
upon  again  the  same  thing  he  was  told:  "Alas,  O  Nana 
bushu!  is  it  true  that  surely  now  you  mean  to  slay  me?" 
he  said  to  him. 

"Of  course!"  said  Nanabushu.  "You  who  slew  my 
parents,"  he  said  to  him,  "you  too  shall  I  slay!"  he  said 
to  him.  At  the  same  time  that  Nanabushu  was  talking, 
he  was  all  the  while  shooting.  And  then  presently  he 
brought  him  down  with  his  shooting.  Thereupon  he  was 
told  again:  "Now,  O  Nanabushu,  do  leave  me  alone! 
In  return  something  will  I  give  you." 

"Hurry  and  give  it  to  me!"  he  said  to  him.  "Tell  me, 
too,  what  you  did  to  my  father  and  mother  and  to  all 
those  who  used  to  live  in  times  past !"  he  said  to  him. 
Whereupon  truly  he  was  told:  "Do  you  see  this  island 
where  now  we  have  fought  each  other?  Those  trees  that 
you  see  standing  are  the  same  as  they  who  used  to  live 
in  times  gone  by.  Such  is  the  form  I  have  made  them, 
that  they  be  as  trees,"  he  was  told.  "Now,  if  you  leave 
me  alone,  I  will  give  you  something  to  use  to  make  them 
come  back  to  life  again,"  he  was  told. 

"Make  haste  and  tell  me  what  I  shall  do  to  bring  them 
back  to  life!" 

"Go  yonder  inside  to  the  place  from  whence  I  rose  to 
my  feet,  and  you  will  see  there  a  small  wooden  pail ;  and 
bring  it  here  to  me." 

Thereupon  Nanabushu  truly  went  to  fetch  it ;  but  he 
did  not  lay  aside  his  bow  and  arrows.  And  then  he  was 
told:  "You  see  what  is  here  contained  in  this  small  pail, 
in  this  small  wooden  pail ;  there  is  contained  here  the 


492 

ka/irndcra'badciba'a't  kos  klga  kaya,"  udinan,  "  minawa 
anint  pa'kan.  Midac  kadotaman :  klgabasagwa'kuwa  a11 
mi'tig  pmic  tciwabamat  mi'tiguwit ;  midac  mi'tigons  katiji- 
tca'kinaman  o^o'  oma11  ma'ka'konsing  a'tag ;  midac  katiji- 
5  cico'a-man  ima  klpaskanaga'kuwat  au  mi'tig,"  udinan. 


"'U11!   mma  ga'kina?"  udinan. 
"Misa"  ga'kina." 

Midac  minawa  ajipimwat  udcickibunwanining,  midac  nisat. 
"UwaM"  udinan.      "Anim1  km  a'pana  wa'i'cka'toyan  a'ki ! 
10  Nongumidac  klgadici'i'n   tci'U'ndcipimadak  a'ki,"  udinan. 


Midac  ka'i'jimadci'tat  klpigickijwat.  Midac  ajisaswawa- 
binat,  papa'kan  ka'kina  ijra'ya'paginat ;  dac  wawlnat  ka- 
dawiniti,  pabamiba'i'tiwat  a'klng  aya*a*wacansag,  kaya 
pabamisatcig,  ki'tciawasiyag  kaya.  Midac  minawa  Nana- 
15  bucu  ka-i'cota'pinang  iu  oma'ka'kons,  kl'i'jictcigat  ka'i'gut. 
Pitclnagigu  pajik  ka'todawat  mi'tigon,  pabiga  klnibawi  ima 
inii^i.  Midac  minawa  pajik  ki'totawat.  Minawa  nlbiwa 
kri'citciga.  Ninguding  idacigu  ml  gimi'kawat  osan  ogln 
kaya,  osayaayan  kaya  Nana'padaman. 


20        Midac  Nanabucu  agut  usayanyan,  pabigagu  oma  mikizu- 
migon  pa'piwat :    "Kiginondawina  klganoninan  ?" 

Nanabucu  dac  udinan:    "Anlndi?"  udinan. 
"Kaga  kimamaji'i'k  a11  alkiwanzl." 

1   Anim,  "Dog"  ....     The  rendering  is  literal,  but  the  sense  is  better  with  some 
such  word  as   "wretch." 


493 

means  by  which  you  are  to  bring  back  to  life  your  father 
and  your  mother,"  he  said  to  him,  "and  all  the  others. 
Now,  this  you  shall  do :  you  shall  scratch  the  bark  from 
the  tree  until  you  see  the  part  in  wood ;  and  then  a  stick 
shall  you  dip  into  this  that  is  contained  here  in  the  little 
wooden  pail ;  and  then  shall  you  rub  it  upon  the  place  where 
you  have  scraped  the  bark  from  the  tree,"  he  said  to  him. 

"Oh!      Is  that  all?"  he  said  to  him. 

"That  is  all." 

Thereupon  again  he  shot  him  in  the  crown  of  the  head, 
whereupon  he  slew  him.  "There,  now!"  he  said  to  him. 
"Dog1  that  you  are,  who  was  ever  bent  upon  destroying 
the  earth!  So  now  I  will  derive  from  you  the  source  by 
which  the  earth  will  be  replenished,"  he  said  to  him. 

Thereupon  be  began  slicing  him  into  small  pieces  with 
a  knife.  And  as  he  scattered  the  pieces  about,  in  all  the 
various  directions  he  flung  them ;  then  he  named  them 
what  they  were  to  be,  they  that  run  about  upon  the  earth 
as  the  little  animal-folk,  and  they  that  fly  about  in  the 
air,  and  also  the  large  animal-folk.  And  then  next  after 
Nanabushu  had  taken  up  the  little  pail,  he  did  what  he 
had  been  commanded.  As  soon  as  hes  had  done  it  to 
one  tree,  straightway  there  stood  in  the  place  a  man. 
And  so  to  another  he  did  it.  Again  to  many  he  did  (it). 
And  then  by  and  by  he  found  his  father  and  his  mother, 
and  his  elder  brother  Nana'padam. 

And  then  Nanabushu  was  told  by  his  elder  brother, 
for  immediately  was  he  here  teased  by  him  while  the  people 
laughed:  "Did  you  hear  me  when  I  spoke  to  you?" 

Whereupon  Nanabushu  said  to  him:  "Where?"  he  said 
to  him. 

"When  the  old  man  was  about -to  prevail  over  you." 


494 

Mlnangwana  au  Nanabucu  kablbagimigogubanan  magwa 
klpa'piciwa'i'tiwat  Tcagaka'a'minit-uga'kwan.    Midac  Nana 
bucu  kayabi  a'pidci  undami'tad  apitclba'a'ti  mi'tigo8 ;  nan- 
gwana    anindowiwat   pamakisiwagubanan.      Uwlnga  moski- 
5   namagat  iu  minis. 

63.   NANABUSHU  LEAVES  HIS  BROTHER,  AND  ALSO  HIS 
GRANDMOTHER. 

Midac  Nanabuco  anicina  atiso'kan  tibatcimint,  kra-nimi- 
^catogwan  i'i'we  minis,  ka'pltcipa'tinlnit  pamadisinit  ima11 
minising.  Midac  kaya  win  tibadcimint  ima  kiwunanigwan- 
dank.  A'pidac  Nanabucu  ga'kina  ka'i'cictcigat,  migrrnat 

10  klwawlndamawat  .  wagunan  ka/u-ndcipimadisinit.  Midac 
kaya  iwa  a'pi  klwawinat  iu  kadicini'kananit  awaslya8  kaya 
awaslyansa8  kaya  pabamotanit  a'klng.  Midac  kaya  tiba 
tcimint  iwa  alpi  kiwawlnat  iu  k!ngonya8  ka'u'ci'a't  undci 
mi/u  micinamagwan  kabigickicwat,  kaya  wananan  kadam- 

15  wasinig;  mri*  anadcimint  Nanabucu. 


Midac  kiwa  ajikanonat  osan  ugm  kaya:  "Nos,"  udinan, 
"mlsa  cigwa  tcimadcayan.  Klndac,  nisayan,  Nana'padam, 
mi  gin  oman  ayan  tcikanawanimatwa  oma  ayadcig,"  udinan ; 
"tciuglma'kandawatwa,"  udinan.  "Nlndac  niwri  ja ;  niwl- 
20  nandunawa  no'kumis,"  udinan.  "Nlnglwawindamawa," 
udinan.  "  A'po'tcinanga  tabicko  kiglyawimin  a'pana  kawl- 
tcayawindiyang,"  udinan.  "Kin  win,  nisaya11,  wantci'ta 


495 

And  so  it  was  by  him  that  Nanabushu  was  called  upon 
while  he  and  Hewer-of-his-Shin  were  fighting.  And  now 
Nanabushu  was  yet  very  busy  bringing  the  trees  back  to 
life ;  truly  it  was  they  that  used  to  live  in  a  former  time. 
To  its  full  capacity  was  the  island  crowded. 

63.   NANABUSHU  LEAVES  HIS  BROTHER,  AND  ALSO  HIS 
GRANDMOTHER. 

Thereupon  Nanabushu,  according  to  the  story  that  is 
told  of  him,  must  have  set  to  work  to  enlarge  the  size 
of  the  island,  so  great  was  the  throng  of  them  living  there 
on  the  island.  Now,  it  is  also  told  of  him  that  there  was 
he  very  content.  And  after  Nanabushu  had  finished  every 
thing,  he  then  spoke  to  them,  and  told  them  upon  what 
they  should  subsist.  And  that  was  also  the  time  he  named 
what  (the  people)  should  call  the  big  animal-folk  and  the 
little  animal-folk  and  them  that  crawl  upon  the  ground. 
And  the  story  is  also  told  of  him  how  that  at  the  time 
he  named  the  fishes  which  he  had  created  from  the  Great 
Sturgeon  which  he  had  cut  up,  and  them  that  should  not 
be  used  for  food,  such  is  what  they  tell  of  Nanabushu. 

And  then  they  say  that  he  spoke  to  his  father  and 
mother,  saying:  "My  father,"  he  said  to  them,  "the  time 
is  at  hand  for  me  to  go  away.  -  -  And  you,  my  elder  brother, 
Nana'padam,  do  you  stay  here  to  watch  over  them  who 
are  here,"  he  said  to  him;  "to  be  ruler  over  them,"  he 
said  to  him.  "And  myself,  I  shall  go  away;  I  wish  to  seek 
for  my  grandmother,"  he  said  to  him.  "I  had  made  her 
a  promise,"  he  said  to  him.  "Anyhow,  we  both  have 
not  had  the  same  kind  of  birth,  so  that  we  should  ever  be 
together,"  he  said  to  him.  "You  are  yourself,  my  elder 
brother,  like  a  real  human  being ;  and  (as  for)  myself,  from 


496 

anicinabang  kiglya11  •,  nlndac  wayabinigatag  mrrma  wandci- 
yan,"  udinan   usayanyan. 

Anawidac    Nana'patam    kawin    minwandanzl    pabiga  tci- 
palka/a/t  uclmayan,   anodac  pagusaniman  tciwldclwat. 


5  Nanabucu  dac  ugi'kaniman,  midac  anat :  "Nisaya11!  non- 
gum  kijiga'k  klgawldclwin,  mwlkicipa'kan  o'O'we  minis 
nawatc  tcimistcag,"  udinan,  "pa'kic  tcigi'kandaman  anm 
anigu'kwag  kaganawandaman." 


Midac  kaga't  ajimadcawat,  tcatcikakusawat  a'kubiganig. 

10  Anibabimusawad  dac  ningudingigu  maminonandam  awi 
nini ;  abanabit,  a'ki  a'ta  wayabandank !  Pa'kic  kaya 
anigagigitowag,  kawln  dac  kago  i'kitosl  wasaya'i'mint. 
"Kicrkata,"  udigon  uclmayan  Nanabucon.  "Wlba  tavvun- 
agucin,  kawln  kigatagwicinzlmin  andayang,"  udinan  usa- 

15  yanyan.  Midac  kra'niwawlndamawat  usayanyan  kadici'ir- 
gima^kandawanit  ima  ayanitci8. 


Kaga^idac  udigon  usayanyan :  "Niclm!"  udigon,  "wagun- 
andac  km  wandciogima'kandawasiwatwa,  kin  kipimatcra'twa 
lgi/u  pamadisiwat  ?"  udinan. 

20        Midac  Nanabucu  ajina'kwa/tawat  usayanyan  :   "Nisaya"!" 
udinan,    "kin   ma  kldinanimin  tcikanawanimatwa,"  udinan. 

Ut0n!"  udigon. 

Midac  cigwa  anitagwicinowat  ka'U'ndcimadcawat ;  cayigwa 
ima  anra-yawat  pacu7  mi  wabandank  wasaya/rmint  ki'tci 


497 

what  was  thrown  away  (at  birth)  was  the  source  from 
which  I  sprang,"  he  said  to  his  elder  brother. 

And  though  Nana'patam  was  not  pleased  with  the  thought 
that  so  soon  he  was  to  part  from  his  younger  brother, 
yet  it  was  useless  for  him  to  beg  (Nanabushu)  to  let  him 
go  along. 

But  Nanabushu  knew  his  feelings,  and  so  said  to  him  : 
"O  my  elder  brother!  during  this  day  will  I  go  with  you, 
for  I  wish  to  walk  round  this  island,  so  that  larger  it  may 
become*"  he  said  to  him,  "and  at  the  same  time  that  you 
may  know  how  big  is  the  region  over  which  you  are  to 
keep  watch." 

And  so  they  truly  started  off,  they  went  walking  along 
the  shore  by  the  edge  of  the  water.  Now,  as  they  thus 
walked  along,  of  a  sudden  mindful  was  the  man  ;  as  he 
looked  behind,  land  only  did  he  see.  Now,  as  they  went 
they  talked,  but  nothing  to  say  had  he  who  was  the  elder 
brother.  "Let  us  quicken  our  pace!"  he  was  told  by  his 
younger  brother,  Nanabushu.  "Soon  will  the  evening  come 
on,  and  we  shall  not  have  returned  to  where  we  live," 
he  said  to  his  elder  brother.  And  then,  as  they  went 
along,  he  explained  to  his  elder  brother  how  he  should 
rule  over  them  who  were  there. 

And  so  at  last  he  was  asked  by  his  elder  brother : 
"O  my  younger  brother!"  he  was  asked,  "what  is  the 
reason  that  you  are  not  chief  over  them,  you  who  brought 
back  to  life  them  that  now  are  alive?"  he  said  to  him. 

Accordingly  Nanabushu  gave  answer  to  his  elder  brother : 
"O  my  elder  brother!"  he  said  to  him,  "it  is  you  whom 
I  wish  to  watch  over  them,"  he  said  to  him. 

"Oh!"  he  was  told. 

And  now  they  were  arriving  at  the  place  from  whence 
they  had  started ;  as  they  were  now  drawing  nigh  to  the 
place,  then  he  who  was  the  elder  brother  beheld  a  mighty 

32 — PUBL.    AMER.    ETHN.    SOC.    VOL.    VII. 


498 

zibi  undi'tagwayanik.  Mldac  anat  uclmayan  :  "Anti  wand- 
clmaga'k  owa  zlbi?  Kawin  kago  niwabandanzlnaban," 
udinan  uclmayan. 

Mldac  Nanabucu  anat:  "Kaga/t,"  udinan.     "Kiwabandan 
5   na  agaming?      Mrrma  ka/u-ndcimadcayang,"  udinan. 

Mama'kadandam    idac    Nana'padam.      Mldac  anandank : 
•  "Tibi  ka-u'ndcikaski-o'wangan?"  inandam. 

Nanabucu    dac  awantcicigu  pa'ba'pi ;  ani'i-yinabit  pa'kic 
ani'aTndawabandank    kago    mi'tig   owayacawa'kuwabinank 
10  slbink    ka'Lrndcikaski'o-wat.      Medac  kaga't  kra-nimi'kang. 
"'Au!"   udinan  usayayan.      "Kin   ni'tam   acawandawan." 


"Anln  ka'ijikackioyang?"   udinan. 

"Awau,   kawln  klgapwanawiuslmin !"   udinan. 

Mldac    kaga't   ajra-cawanduwat ;   migu  ni'tam  a'tod  uzit 

1 5   minawa    dac    pajik  umbinang,   ml  aja  agaming  kita'ku^klt. 

Midac     tcipwapigwalkitat     ml     aja     kaya    win    Nanabucu. 

Mldac    inabit,   ml  wabandang  anigu'kuta'tigwayanig  iu  zibi 

abiding  a'ta  ka'u'da'a*mlt. 

Mldac    ima    caylgwa    Nanabucu    wlpa'ka'a/t    usayanyan. 
20   "Mlsa  iu,  nisayan,"  udinan,  "tclpa'ka-i'nan.   Mi  iwiti  kwaya'k 
ijan.       Mi     iwiti     tciwabamatwa     kanaganangwa,"    udinan. 
"Owitidac  kaya  nln   nlngatija,"  udinan. 


Mldac  pa'ka'i'tiwat.      Anicna  atiso'kan,  kawln  Nanabucu 

tibatcimasl    ina'kawe    tcigra'wina'kawa   wabamat  umgi'i'go 

25   a'pl  wanagadank  iu  minis.      Mlya'ta  tabatcimint  ajipa'ka'a't 


499 

river  flowing  by.  Thereupon  he  said  to  his  younger  brother : 
"From  whence  flows  this  river?  Nothing  (of  a  river)  did 
I  see  before,"  he  said  to  his  younger  brother. 

Whereupon  Nanabushu  said  to  him:  "Ay,"  he  said  to 
him.  "Do  you  see  the  other  shore?  It  is  from  over 
there  that  we  started,"  he  said  to  him. 

Astonished  then  was  Nana'padam.  And  then  he  thought : 
"Wonder  where  shall  we  be  able  to  get  across?"  thus  he 
thought. 

But  Nanabushu,  on  his  part,  only  gave  a  laugh ;  as  he 
went  he  observed,  and  as  he  went  he  was  at  the  same 
time  seeking  for  some  kind  of  a  log  to  lay  across  the 
stream  so  that  they  might  be  able  to  cross.  It  was  true 
that  he  found  one  on  the  way.  "Come  on!"  he  said  to 
his  elder  brother.  "You  first  cross  over  on  the  log." 

"How    shall  we  be  able  to  get  over?"  he  said  to  him. 

"Why,  we  shall  not  fail  in  the  undertaking!"  he  said 
to  him. 

Thereupon  truly  crossed  he  over  upon  the  log ;  the 
moment  he  put  down  one  foot  and  then  lifted  the  other, 
that  very  instant  he  stepped  on  the  other  shore.  And  so 
before  he  turned  about  (to  see  if  the  other  was  coming), 
then  was  Nanabushu  also  across.  And  as  he  looked,  he 
then  beheld  how  wide  was  the  river  which  only  at  a  single 
step  he  had  passed  across. 

It  was  there  that  Nanabushu  now  meant  to  part  with 
his  elder  brother.  "The  time  has  come,  my  elder  brother," 
he  said  to  him,  "for  me  to  part  from  you.  Straight 
yonder  way  do  you  go.  Over  there  will  you  see  them 
whom  we  have  left,"  he  said  to  him.  "And  over  in  this 
(other)  direction  I  myself  will  go,"  he  said  to  him. 

Thereupon  they  parted  from  each  other.  According  to 
the  story,  not  is  it  told  if  Nanabushu  first  went  to  see 
his  parents  when  he  left  the  island.  All  that  is  told  of 


500 

usayayan  kaya  awi  wabamat  olkumisan.  Midac  Nanabucu 
kiwan  anitagwicing  o'kumisan  andanit  ayeyanit,  inat  tibicko 
ka'i'na'pan  udanang :  "Nintagwicin,  no'kumis." 


"Nya'ais!  nya'ais!    Anlnsa  a'pidci  wa'i'jinanapagansumiyaj 
5   acpana!"  i'kito  mindimoya. 


"Kawm,  no'kumis!      Nm  kaga't"  udinan. 

Midac  a-i'ji'i'nabit  skwandang,  mldac  kagat  wabamat 
ojisan  pipmdiganit.  "Nya!  nojis  mmangwana  kaga't  tii- 
gwucing !"  udinan.  "Kmibu  nintinandanaban,"  udinan. 


10  Midac  Nanabucu  wabamat  o'kumisan,  a'pidci  wabiskanig 
ustigwanini  mldac  anandank :  "Papiga  ajiwabickanig  usti- 
gwan,"  inandam.  Mldac  agut  o'kumisan  :  "Nojic,  katcinana 
ningrirndand  kitinandam  ?  Kinwanj  aniwak  kigri'nand," 
udinan  ojisan.  "Mldac  kaya  kanabatc  caylgwa  tcinagani- 

15   nan,"  udinan  ojisan. 


"Ayec,    no'kumis.     Mi  owiti  kadacayan  ka'pi'u'ndciyan,' 
udinan.      "Mri'witi  nisayan  kra'sak  tci'irgima'kandonag." 


Mldac  kaga't  mindimoya  ajimadcat,   aja'a'nat  ojisan. 

Kaya  win  dac  Nanabucu  animadca,  ningutci  pa'kan  ijat; 
20  kayabi  nongum  pimusatug,   tibi  nongum  ayagwan  ;  magica 
kaya  kayabi  nongum  pamusagwan. 


him  is  that  he  parted  from  his  elder  brother  and  that  he 
went  to  see  his  grandmother.  And  now  they  say  that 
when  Nanabushu  arrived  at  the  home  where  his  grand 
mother  was,  he  said  to  her  the  same  thing  that  he  had 
said  to  her  in  times  gone  by:  "I  have  come  home,  O 
my  grandmother !" 

"Oh,  dear  me!  Oh,  dear  me!  Why  should  you  always 
desire  to  afflict  me  grievously  with  such  words!"  said  the 
old  woman. 

"Nay,   my  grandmother!      It  is  truly  I!"  he  said  to  her. 

Thereupon,  vas  she  looked  toward  the  doorway,  then 
verily  she  beheld  her  grandson  come  entering  in.  "Ah, 
me !  it  is  my  dear  grandson  who  has  actually  come  back 
home!"  she  said  to  him.  "He  is  dead,  such  was  my 
thought  of  him,"  she  said  to  him. 

And  so  as  Nanabushu  looked  upon  his  grandmother, 
exceedingly  white  was  her  hair.  And  this  he  thought : 
"In  so  short  a  while  has  her  hair  whitened,"  he  thought. 
Whereupon  he  was  told  by  his  grandmother:  "My  grand 
son,  do  you  think  that  you  have  been  absent  but  a  little 
while?  A  long  time  have  you  been  gone,"  she  said  to 
her  grandson.  "And  perhaps  the  time  has  come  for  me 
to  leave  you,"  she  said  to  her  grandson. 

"Yes,  my  grandmother.  To  yonder  place  from  whence 
I  now  have  come  shall  you  go,"  he  said  to  her.  "At 
that  place  have  I  placed  my  elder  brother,  that  he  might 
be  ruler  over  you  (and  the  rest)." 

And  then  truly  the  old  woman  departed,  she  followed 
back  the  footsteps  of  her  grandson. 

And  Nanabushu  himself  went  his  way,  off  in  some  other 
direction  he  went  •,  still  to  this  day  must  he  be  travelling 
along,  wherever  the  place  he  now  may  be  •,  and  perhaps 
even  to  this  day  he  may  be  walking. 


PUBLICATIONS  ISSUED  BY  THE  AMERICAN 
ETHNOLOGICAL  SOCIETY. 

TRANSACTIONS  OF  THE  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGICAL  SOCIETY. 
Vols.  I-HI,  1845-51.     (Out  of  print.) 

BULLETIN    OF    THE    AMERICAN    ETHNOLOGICAL    SOCIETY, 
1860-63!     (Out  of  print.} 

JOURNAL   OF  THE  ANTHROPOLOGICAL  INSTITUTE  OF  NEW 
YORK.     Vol.   i,  No.  i,   1871-73.     (Out  of  print.} 

Dr.  C.  H.  BERENDT,   Analytical    Alphabet   for  the   Mexican  and  Central 
American  Languages  (printed  in  facsimile).     (Out  of  print} 

TRANSACTIONS  OF  THE  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGICAL  SOCIETY. 
Vol.  III.     Reprinted  in  1909. 

PUBLICATIONS  OF  THE  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGICAL  SOCIETY. 
I.     WILLIAM  JONES,  Fox  Texts.     1907.     383  pp. 

II.     EDWARD  SAPIR,  Wishram  Texts.     1909.     314  pp. 

III.  JOHN  R.  SWANTON,  Haida  Songs;   FRANZ  BOAS,  Tsimshian  Texts. 
1912.     284  pp. 

IV.  ROLAND  B.  DIXON,  Maidu  Texts.     1912.     241  pp. 

V.     WALDEMAR  BOGORAS,  Koryak  Texts.     1916.     153  pp. 

VI.     JOHN  W.  CHAPMAN,   Ten 'a  Texts  and  Tales  from  Anvik,  Alaska; 
with  Vocabulary  by  PLINY  EARLE  GODDARD.    1914.     vi  +  230  pp. 

VII.     Part   I.      WILLIAM    JONES,    Ojibwa    Texts.      Edited    by   Truman 
Michelson.     1917.     xxi  +  501  pp. 

Part  II.      WILLIAM   JONES,    Ojibwa    Texts.      Edited    by    Truman 
Michelson.     In  press. 

VIII.     JOHN  R.  SWANTON,  Haida  Texts.     In  press. 

IX.     WILLIAM  JONES,  Kickapoo  Texts.     Edited  by  Truman  Michelson. 
1915.     143  pp. 


RETURN     CIRCULATION  DEPARTMENT 

TO— *>      202  Main  Library 


LOAN  PERIOD  1 
HOME  USE 

2                        : 

3 

4 

5                               < 

5 

ALL  BOOKS  MAY  BE  RECALLED  AFTER  7  DAYS 

DUE 

AS  STAMPED  BELOW 

KTD     APR  3  0  198 

MAY    9  1986- 

EB  0  9  2005 

RECEIVED  BY  [ 

MAR  I  fi  ?nnfi 

APR 
APR    !•  J986J 

\  2  199Z 

CIROd 

LAT10N  DEPT. 

1  REC'D  APR  12*92 

B101388 

LIBRARY  US* 

M^{l\    ^ 

APR  1  3  1992 

'iTR  r      MAR  °  S  1rifift 

AiiTO   DISC. 

" 
i   c  mof 

APR  1  3  1992 

QJTQ  i  5  iaai 

•MOOl  11     ATSOM 

UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA,  BERKELEY 

FORM  NO.  DD6,  60m,  1/83  BERKELEY,  CA  94720 

®$ 


GENERAL  UBRflBY.ac.BEBKELEy 


