ce RRB GD 


— CANADA 
DEPARTMENT OF MINES 


uo Hon, Cnant Kg SrRWwakt, Manistee; Cuan us. CAMSTLLy Daryty Manteran 


NATIONAL MUSEUM ‘OF CANADA 


WY Conana, ACTING Dranctor a 


ANTHROPOLOGICAL SERIE, No, it 7 


Sacred Stories of the Sweet Grass Cree 


“Ly Bloomfield: 


- | Panes 0 tht mind sot TxeaLLANE MANET a oe re 
7 Pri 60 ents et | 


CANADA 
DEPARTMENT OF MINES 


Hons CH aut Sewan, Minato; Cuamtid Camadin, Diceuey Minigiice 


' taeda iarmnaiababia) 


NATIONAL; MUSEUM Of CANADA 


* OW. TL Conaaa, AGUNG Dincron 


cadeieaaosinimteniameunanbienamaicak 


~ 


7 
ts 


| BULLYIN No, oo | 


A HOFOLOOICAL Sinise, No, of 


Sacred Stories of the Sweet Grass Cree: 


ny , , 
I, Bloomfleld 


‘sy wok 
sGPohs t 


AGA PLACE OUR RRO ARIA BARR AEC 


lata eC RE T 1 SRIBETR “AOE RISES VET A TE RL ERATED ATE LY “OEE 


CITAWA 

‘ . A, ACLAND _ 

PAINT PO CTHO TONG MOLE EX CRLAINE MALTY 
soo 


7 ‘ 
— 
. s 
1 r 
. . 
Se o 
3% : 
rye 
‘ 
' 
pote . 
- “ 
’ - 
‘ ‘ wo ‘ 
. , 
" 
‘ 
a 
io, 
4 . ~ 
3 
St 
cared 
U ~ - 
AL . 
4 L 
‘ 
‘ . 
, 
\ — 
\ 
\ 
‘ . 
. . an 
“ 
A , 


Pzd 


CONTENTS 
Panu 
UNUHOIUCUUON, corse rere ener rere este e tren es atten byevtaenayranurenrerae aes t 
Dintinative soyndayof Madu Creo Peete reecereaereeene Deets erenaecereners Q 
Canarn amtura Of WhO WOxltiesseccccseeecescescsccseveusececes rte yee ‘6G 
Lint of nyiibola unede.e cee Cae reteenrseee beeen een terete etaeeenenee t 
Pax AND PMANHLATIONN, Coccc cree eter en creer ren bene been teage 7 8 
Q) ‘The Bhth of Winnhkatehabk unl the Origin af Mundt... Sevens tas) O8 
(2) Winnhkatelahh, the Partridgen, and tha Hones cccccs eer eee 20 
(3) Winhketehahte VinitH the Parteldgets cer ccc eee cree cree esr e ea cenneee 27 
(4) Winnhkoetobahk Proaohen to tha Wolvet,.ccccce ri ee bere aaeenaes 30 
(6) Winahkotehmbl Stabaa Buffalo and Both Hi AM. ccce eee en 42 
(8) Phe Shut-Mye Dancers. cree creer erence ee beeen ene eeneaaaes vt 
% (7) Wisnbbatebabk as Capac cccere rss cceer rer ererrranes Lieveneane 0) 
(8) Winnhketohahk and the Bone, . Decker eeeeettyenan Diveneeaeuens 48 
() Witahketehalk and the Hupidn.. Dee bete ere tenreneeaaes Deen eneueeenete 2 
(10) Witnbketohaht and thea Magia Qomdgenry ccc cece eee ere eres 53 
CUE) Phe BonteWomnnyieccrecceretns ener be ctrebeevecerensteneneetaas a i7 
(12) The Howrsurke Wome ccecc eect rete rere trees anes pete eaeueuegs GL 
G9) Little Nnow-Darhoccce eer ccc ee Deen eevueaee beeen eueerveseatreee ug 
(4) Little Nnew-Darbs circ ees bet eneeneee Seder kere evetretaeetnnnend 00 
(HB) PINO-TROOb cera e reece eer te ee tnareer renee eerenes peeves gens Ri 
(18) Pine-Rootie.c.e. Cet taeenes Perse ert ee eee eens tiseeees BO 
(17) 4 MOU rere eesece rere sents eneeen cri rene dy buenas ve lpeeeereeunas (4) 
(1K) VinhoralineTlabe eee beeen beer nee eneenaes peveee 420 
ent) ) eeu dowd nnd Vin Nophows. lee utero veuteuenne beveetereetueys » ia 
(20) FltitirHonrer,,. Seb eeneeeneeernee bre enenee bevertrertieeeettnens $82 
(AN) MuneChild ce ceca : Pere eee tenet ene nee verter 177 
(22) Ile Wha Cnrrind ‘tho Old Wom, betbetbestentervens Sevotntreeteeeag V4 
(28) Vhunitorbird and WING creek cers ere reer corns eer eea ees beer ey 
(24) ‘The Ten Nrolhothecscsecccccccsccelscccecvsecvecsseusevssuveueeen. 221 
(25) Burnt-Stlales ccs sr ee Dedede terete teen ene oeeetenbers Deserts eran eee 
ie he Vhundorera Hrothoreintebnws, peennens pete etree nen ree) 
(47) Why the Dead are Buried, . PEO Rete EEE EMTS e Deen tees abe 
(28) Tho Origin of Mord@tvaceccserer err eueeeenrreerrens lo venenenenns tere B57 
CAN) ADDI creer r ert e eter renter etree tas Piece enter enes peeves BRO 
(0) Partrldgo and Quill voces Fa BH 
COV) TLONRDEVOr cece cence een eens Deny e eee rent neeaees ree 311) 
(32) Peeled vi ocean eicneser senses vente beteteeeee beeen enens "Stn 
(83) ‘Tho Moolah Mido cscs cece cece treet crete rr ettreereteer eee BLO 
(84) ‘Nhe Poollah Maidens and One-Log. beeteeneceguerenenens tereerecerene GEA 
(35) ‘The Spleit, Kldlion Sa Sf 
(36) Mndditessccssseseerccc cece teens Sev eeventrapeeevaeenenes teveeenae OOD 

WILBO—t4 


7) 


} 
\ 
| 
\ 
; 


« 


\ 
\ 
i 
| 
5 


4 


‘S 


. = BAGRED STORIES OF THE SWEET GRASS CREE 


. : INTRODUCTION 


These texts are part of a sorios writton from dictation during a five 


wookw stay on Sweet Crass Rosorve (Battleford Agenoy, Saskatehowan), 


in the summer of 1925, | 
“Tho principal informants hore roprosented are aa followa: 
, Coming-Day (ha-ktalkdi-pthinkdw), a blind old man; the Sweet 
Grass Crea say that ho knows more traditional stories than any other 
momber of the band. [Woe was oasily trained to dictate, but, to the end 
could) not be vid of cartain faulta, Mapecially when fatigued, he would 
aimplify his stories or omit\ portiona of them. Oconsionally he would 
Interrupt the dictation to tell me rapidly -by way of a footnote, aa it wore 
—the matter which he had onjitted; or he would appond it aftor finishing 
the digtation; he coud not bb persuaded to dictate these portions, .An- 
othor of hin faults is not uncommon among Indian infoymants: ho will 
suddenly ‘avoid using some-perfactly “common aud harmless word, He 
explained by saying that he feared To might not andorstand the word. 
This ix obviously a riutionalization; Coming-Day know that U had only a 
xml voonbilary, that it did not matter whothor T understood averything 
nt the time of dietation, and, abovo all, be was oxtramely kind and patient 
in explaining (in Cree; he speaks no English) the meaning of oxprossions 
that fqid. not understand, f cannot oxplain the sporadia avoidineo of 
words, but suspect it to be in tome way an outgrowth (extension in the 
prosoncs of & foreignor?) of the word-taboo that oxista in every language. 
Similarly,"Goming-Day will now and thon, as though perversoly, use the 
Jon appropriate of two synonyms, perhaps afterwards adding the right 
one. Thus, ab thevond of a story, ho will charnctorizo it ad dlaimduwin, 
whon it in dlaydhkdwwin (See bolow), or vieo versa, or he will use both terma. 
In spite of these faulla, heia na splendid informant: a good dictator, vu pationt 
instructor, and a onarrator gonoroas of his immense lore, 

Adan Sakewow (sdkdiedi), ix close companion, i4 stylistically moro 
riffed, uses a grentor vocabulary, but, espedially in his earlior toxta, did 
not dictate as woll, He knows far loss tradition than hig friend, but when 
he tells a atory, ib is better told. 

Mra, Maggio Achonun (hd-wihkaakusahk), & middle-aged woman, 
dichates: poorly; tn awl hor stories there wore sentonces which I did not got 
a chance to take down, Wurthor, sho insists that sho is no story-tollor, 
and, dndood, she omits parts of her stories, or gots thom mixed up, Novor- 
tholoss, L took as much dichution from her as (eould get, for sho is full of 
intoresting things (being, in fact, something of a sorceress); moro than 
one archiute trait will bo found in her toxts, 

Louis Moosomin (wdh~ndmishwakdpaw), blind from childhood, a man 
of iniddle age, uses inany archaig oxprossions, and dictates well, oxcept 
that in the process of slow speech he ofton gets muddlod in his construction. 

I hazard tho conjocture that the speoch-mechanism of the Sweet Grass 
Circo represents an archaic typo: speech about any oxciting topic is usually 
accompanied by a higher degree of excitement (gesture and non-social 


: \ 


aymptonme) than de the ome with acorn wlth woodkimad Tndiani ‘Chi, hows 
ever donate trae of all informants vetably uot ef Coming Day, nor of 
Louly Mooronin, nor have Tabrorved tt ta wonen, 


None of the procodiag epowka Hnglkih,  Uwa Engthih-oakdius Crea, - 
Hhivey Watnoy and Norman Shuainghown (adagdskdatade), beth young. 
ten, pave tae tay foundation ta Cree, Cho focmen dpoakee Cree ours 
noithor af Chom ent tramidatos  Raptlite Pooyails a maa al talddle age, % 


it the only peron CE found who oan with aay eonrtkitenoy tell dia Magli 
the iedning af a Cree expromdon, ~ Uiifortanately: be help wan available 
only for rbort peclodin Maya word or phrase tn the Coxtt hare comlnod 
uningellipthle fo me, 

Heorder (6 holp Che reader evaluate the Cexta have divelt too mutch, 
perhaps, on the shorteondnge ol the Swoot Cua daformantéa te voatléy, 
ihe Sweet Cae people were, without exception, knd, helpful, and honplt- 
Able. Toowe thanke alee to (ho untieing firm-dneatenetor, Ale Matthew 
Payfons and to Mra Taytons also to the Ageney ata at datdoford, Ate, 
B.S, Maedotld, Ds Norquay, and Mir Stalthy and to Bather Lacamlio 
(hephow of the anther of “Crammuite et detormaltve de la langue der 
Crin” Montreal, (8th), ; 

The work? wat throughout made pomblo only by the Tindnent of 
offiokihe of the National Museum of Canada, Mi HL Sapir and May be bs 
Rolton, and by the eourteny of the Indhin Dopartinent, 

Te By 
Divreveri Bounon aie Puarna (end 


(HConsonante 


Rilabial: py on 
Dontaly. fie ot 
Velure £ i ; 
Clotlaky. = oA foo. 
(4) Somivewelus \ 
Lablovetars wo \ SO 
Palatal: uv \ 
(8) Vowel _ ° 
Short, high: t, we 
Short, low: t 
Long, high: 0 
Long, low: \ ag 


The vonronant combinations condat of dors before Dt ts, hy 

Kor the gonoral charactor and hidorleal relations of there sounds, see 
the disoumdon of the Contral Algonquian sound aystom in Language,” 
j 130. A Het of the aymbol nied in hose texte with rough desaription of 
their kound values is given at tho end of this intraduotion (page 6), 

A nomrignitionnt atreas accent falke on the third avllable from. the 
ond of words ov olosesknit: phrasos: id/fivatws a Croos ndliyawaks Cros; 
vehied te danas that womrnn, - 

_., vidal vowels have an on-elide of A andor stress, expodially in inter 
joctions; Aay hay {splendid , 

Hnal vowels havo noarly abyaye an ofl-glide of As maski, maskwah : 
bear, In tho word dha’: yes, the off-plido always takos the form of a 
glottal stop; this Ihave indicated by the symbol’. 


\ 


2 


a 


é 
§ . vy 

When flnat and Initial vowoli cone Lopratlor la the noutende, tho A 
glide may remain; Chili dt the nlow aud Call form atupooety awa’ dakwdu 
thin worn, Cn fantee and more natuteal qpoooh, the Jegclite may dldappomwe 
or inay-be replaced by ce (fone of the vowoln ti oc a) oe by y (fone of 
the vowolt lad 3, ord); awa dahwdo, away dakwdo © (htt womans kthe 
wind, Mealtinan, dieo-u'dinam ¢ ho tan talon th 

If, hawover, the flirt of (he wo vowel ti thort, a diferent typo of 
oommbingtlon ta more commons both the gllde sound and the short (nal 
vowel avo lost, and the daitdal vowel, Uonhort, la longthoneds aw vahiodio s 
thin woman, The atvon, ib will be nobloed, of an olldod ahort vowel, stage 
on tho vowel with whloh lt haw morged.  Mlaal « doviaton: before at 
willko vowel lt li roplaced by w, and the followlig vowel, Uhort, ta lengths 


se 


onods phys euly, and fade thin, gly gil ads ti every ways; pike wid 
i . t : Ya | . 


eervak ¢ sonoone, lye pike aoeiah ) unyonoe ab all, everyone, 

Th corlaln combination a final long vowel moron with ag bilttal 
vowel, ‘Than d and éylved ¢ kata, ke d/todt what he qadd, Aliodlarly, 
aund vy plyo ays keh-wtnahh, k-oltinahh « whathe took. Ti some common 
cotohinatlons llnal @ morgen wlth other vowels dhah awiyak, dk aoiyab § 
lont anyane, . , 

Varloua: modiflontlonn of those bablve of vowel oormblaation osour, 
butomy knowledge of the dlaloat doo nok suffeo to formulate thous 

Tho unitocustomed oar dian dioulty la dlitlagalitlng tho vowel 

“quautillon, onpoolatly dn oortadn posttlons, ans bofers AO plus conpotut; 
hofore ws aftor gouronant geoupa. Mhut, ahdadada se rlag (! tako thin to 
be the actual, or, aby rato, the normal form of the word), sounded bo 
mo Uke ahi, Whhania, “hledate © agahte gine © Wniolfogt, appones 
In tay oartor toxta an ayahtayintw, Vo the oad, b hiad ao certainty on 
(hit polut. Hefore yo tho dlatinotlon of @ and 4 sooun ouldroly tnoldags 


TL have written ¢y unlformly, neyor ys 


Betwoon like contonanti, oxpogally botwoon Inblala and belwoon 


dontaly, a thors vowel la often lonty tedaqakauldéndkan o lap, wie had’ 
' J 


vekans ndnitae . anywhore, naitaw. When tn sioh eaios the group ae 


ia formod after acthort vowel, the a le long and probably always syllables 
hu'ndtah : atrandom, varlourly, beuladah (with long, syllable a), Slinilacly, 
when fa, pre noo nedio, tho oa, ae da nyllablos wttnam ¢ he batcen it, aden 
“(ayllablo ns afatetin shad, astute (iyllnblo ny OH de Maplin budton): 
perdiidw she walley—-pavuhtde (nytlablo a). Ooeaslonally wo short 
vowola ave thin lois pdi'pahtaw sho rut, pr pahtaw (syllable m), 

The sound A, 0, y alternate in rapld apoooh according. to the: ate 
rounding vowel; dheadha’mugit: whon the other sings, dhsnadkea’ mail ¢ 
Geiat"h ttode she anya to, Onedal’y ited, bosldo tho more Common Guede 
Vhodw sof, above, 

Tho sound-group Ay appeara botwoon a-vowelx, oge. wahyaw 6 far, 
alyapiy wots bub whore it is hindorically to be oxpectodt before or aftor 
#, 1, d, wo have hs ahdws ho places him (Menatalni anew, ox andwa), 
pimihdo sho flo (Monomind poma’new, Fox penciadwa), Tn thone oason 
{ soom to have hoard occasional pronungiations with hy, but Gis may. bo 
an error of ming. T soom to have hoard Ay also occasionally in pihdw 
(pihydw): partridge, s word whose history I do not know. 

Nequoncos of vowola and somivowels aro subject to gront variation, 
T havo not succooded in fully analysing this; tho following aro tho clourost 
CANCK, _ 


+ 


P 


> 


4 


44 Pete goa 


Initial uy- similarly appears often as wiy- ; uydkan : bowl, wiydkan, | 


afterwards, muystas. 


~~... The combination iyi seems often to be merged tot; kéhta'wiyinaw : 


our father, kdhta/winaw ; in this instance and in some others the place of 
the stress’ presupposes 7-rather than yz. 


~ The sound here represented by d is a long mid front vowel (as in Ger- 
man Tee); the symbol é is used for the’sake of uniformity with other 
Algonquian texts; @ would be better. Indeed, the vowel is, to my car, 
quite close to7, and I have no doubt sometimes confused the-two. - In some 
words the variation of d and 7 is probably real and not merely my mis-~ 
hearing, as kdkway : something, beside kikway - kdtahtawéh: ata point 
in time, beside kitahtawah. . o 7 

The sound s varies freely between normal and abnormal sibilant. It 
is often spoken Jong, especially after stressed vowels (i.e., after the ante- 
penultimate vowel), e.g. in asiniy ; stone, asamdw: he gives him to cat, 
misiwah : all over. It is tempting to view this long s as the reflex of old 
consonant groups that still appear in Menomini and are represented in 
Ojibwa by unvoiced s (as opposed to voiced z): Menomini a’sen : stone, 
ahsdmdw: he gives him to eat. This hypothesis, however, was not verified: 
the difference between shorter and longer s seems to be non-distinctive, for, 
firstly, all gradations between the shortest and longest forms scem to 
occur; secondly, both short and long forms are used in the same word; 
and, thirdly, the longer form is not confined to. words that once had the 
consonant group, but seems to occur in any and all, as mistwéh: all over 
(Menomini meséwd, but here Cree ss might be analogically due to misi- : 
big, Menomini me’si-), isth : thus (Menomini 7s, 7séh). I soon found it 
impracticable to try to record the apparent quantitative fluctuations of s. 

Medially k is often voiced, as, uspwakan; pipe; this has not. been 
indicated, as it is not distinctive. - 

There seems to be some fluctuation between final -h (whether histori- 
cally old h or a glide, is indifferent in Cree) and.-hk ; thus the conjunct 
ending for he... it, as Gh-utitwk : when he takes it, dh-utinah, Similarly 
between final*s and -sk ; piyis: at last, piyisk. In some words there 
seems to be no such fluctuation, as, askihk : kettle, mdnisk : earthwork. 
If this observation be correct, the hhenomenon is due to sandhi variants 
analogically turned loose; words with obvious inflectional parallels 
(askihkwak : kettles) would be. protected. ; : 


~ 


5 


In these texts I have used one, and only ono, symbol for each Cree 
phoneme (a digraph for ts), and have not adopted extra symbols for vari- 
ations within any Cree phoneme, such as fronted and backed a, or voiced 
k; such distinctions, however precious to. foreign ear, aro irrelevant to 
the language we ure considering, 

“But whore variation involves different Cree phonemes, Uhave tried to 
record it; as, whon a is fronted all the way to i rea) 1 or backed all the 
wry to (Creo) u; dh-apiyan, ahbeapiyin : when thou sittest there; deawaham 
he crosses it (water), dsiwaham, deuwaham, dsdwaham. 

In these texts I have kept the forms as they were actually taken from 
dictation. The only exceptions are, first, that my notes are here: reduced 
to the distinctive sounds of Cree, irrclevant varintions (such as attempts 
to note the fluctuating quantities of s) being eliminated; second, [ have 
corrected forms which repeated experience showed to be, beyond reason- 
able doubt, errors of mine, the correct form being, again beyond reasonable 
doubt, available. In this [ have been extremely conservative; the reader 
will be able to correct many « form that I have left in the text either 
because I am not absolutely sure that the deviation is due to my error, or 
because, having crred, | was not sure of the proper correction. Where the 
eccentric form seems to interfere with the sense, a note is appended; it 
is jist in those cases that alteration is dangerous: the form may be rare or 
archaic; if not, even an informnant’s “slip of the tongue” may be of interest, 
and lies beyond our right of correction, Or again, in some of the texts a 
word will appear consistently in divergent form; I have left it so, for it 
may have been the speaker and not my ear that deviated. 

I have tried to adapt punctuation and word division to the structure 
of Cree, making the former as intelligible and the latter ag complete as 
possible. : \ 

The hyphen is used between members of compounds. In noun com- 
pounds the first member usually adds -i; paskwdwi-mustus : buffalo 

‘ (paskwéw : prairie). This merges with preceding postconsonantal w to u; 
masku-pimty : bear's fat. (maskwah bear, stem maskw-). In the remainin; 
compound words the first member ig a particle, e.g. pdni-kimiwan: 1t\ 
stops raining. The hyphen distinguishes these compounds from unit 
words, such as péndyimdw : he stops thinking of him (-dyimdw does not 
occur as an independent word). 

This distinction has been partly troubled in Cree. For instance, 
historically, alim: dog, horse, is an independent word, whereas -astim 


in the same meaning, is a medial stemy as in wdpastim : white dog or horse. - 


But actually we find, on the one hand, misatim : horse, where historically” 


we should have either a compound word, *misth-atim, *mis-dtim (misth : 
big), or a unit word *mistastim. On the other hand, we have matsastim : 
evil dog, where historically we should have either the compound *matszh- 
atim, *mats-Gtim, or the unit word *matastim. Similarly, we find forms 
like kihtsdyiméw : he is conceited, where the initial stem kihi-: big, has 
taken on the form of the independent particle kihisih : big, beside the 
historically justified kihtéyimow. 

: Consequently my use of hyphen will not always be found consistent. 
A form like nahapiw: he sits down, might well be taken as nah-apiw, 
since there is a particle nahih : well adjusted, and a verb apiw: he sits 
there. Yet we write nahapiw because the ordinary type of sandhi for a 


t 


e 


’ 


6 


compound would give *nahth-apiw or *nahedpiw (See page 5); hence 
noha in pornllel with the unmistakable unit word dlapiw : he sits thus, 
Histonieally, wo may compare Menomini nandhapiw (reduplicated), which 
it in the phonetic syatem of Menomini charactorized is an unmistakable 
unit word, But the historical criterion is irrclevant; the chief real criterion 
is negative (absence of certain sandhi forms); hence I could not always 
vet it right. 1 have not used the hyphen in particle compounds with ayihk 
an second member, eg. pthts-aythk : inside, although ayihk is plainly the 
local form of ayth: such and such thing, and the first members are 
plainly derivatives with suflix -¢ forming particles: to use the hyphen here 
would demand getting up too many particles that occurred only in com- 
position with aythk, ” 


An interesting case is that of the initial element nistwandt-: destroy, 
asin nistwandtathdw : he destroys him. This is an old form, cf. Menomini 
ne'awandl-: moss, confusion, Here some speakers have an analogic 
reformation, as in mint-unentsthdw : he destroys him, where the form is 
interpreted as having an initial clement -wandl-, extended form of wan-: 
disappeur (c.g. wanthdw : hd loses him), with prefixed particle misih ; big. 


Reduplication which leaves the stem unchanged has been separated by 
a hyphen, as, pa-pimuhldw : he walks and walks, but the (archaic) types 
where the stem is changed have been written as unit words; papadmuhtdw : 
he walks about. 


“ GENERAL NATURE OF THE TExTs | 


The texts here given are stories of the kind called dtayohkdwin. An 
Glaydhkdwin or sacred story is a traditional story concerning the time when 
the world was not yet in its present, definitive state. The actors are often 
the totem ancestors (I am not sure that this term is appropriate for the 
Plains Cree) before they took the shape of present-day animals. Or the 
storics are in thestime when utsahkdtsahk was on this earth. He, however, 
is not the high spirit that he is among the more easterly Algonquian- 
speakirig tribes, and much about him is inexplicable: . Péople! wonder why 
he callscverybody “younger brother.” The Sun-Daice is crowding out 
the Mitewin; at Sweet Grass the latter is viewed as black magic. 


List or SYMBOLS UsED 


The equivalents from European languages are in part rough approxi- 
mations. 


a short, low vowel, usually like the vowel of German nass, but vary- 
ing occasionally forward, through the vowel of French paite, all 
the way to that of English pet; or backward, all the way to the 
vowel of American English son. 


long, low vowel, as in English father, but tending in the direction of 
the vowel in English saw. . 
long, mid front vowel, as in German Tee, geht. 


as in English hand; it occurs, however, also finally and before 
Dp, t, ts, k. ° 


iT) 


=~ @: 


a 


7 


k 


m 


i \ ” ° ‘ oes 


‘ \ 


short, high front vowel, as in English pin, varying all the way to 
the type, of French fini. 


Tong, high font vowel, as in German thn, French rive. 


unvoiced:velar stop, as in English kill, cow, but usually unaspirated, 
a8 j in-Ihglish skill, French coup.. Within the word after a vowel 
“it is ofteh voiced, ‘hence like the initial of English go. 


voiced bilabial nasal, as in English man. 


Sr 
oa voiced postdental nasal, as in French nid. 


‘6 


long; mid back vowel, rounded, as in German so, French chose; it 
varics all the way. to a high vowel, as 8 in~ Cicrntan « dub French 
rouge. 


unvoiced bilabial stop, as in English spin, French patte. 


s unvoiced sibilant, varying all the way from the normal sibilant as 


in Inglish sce, to the abnormal, as in English she. 
unvoiced postdental stop, as in French out. e 
affricate of unvoiced postdental stop plus sibilant, varying all the 
way from the final of English oats to the sound in English church. 


short, high back vowel, rounded, varying all the way from that in 
English put to that in French coupe. 


unsyllabic u, as in English well. 


unsyllabic 7, as in English yes. 


(superior comma) glottal stop, only in the word dha’: yes. 


4 


8 


TEXTS AND TRANSLATIONS 
(1) The Birth of Wisahketchahk and the Origin of Mankind 
Louts Moosomin 
nah-namiskwékdpaw. 


kayds kitahtawd —- dkwah nitétaydhkan — Kitahtawé yahkih -payak 
nipéw pdyakukamikisiw, wiwa dkwah nis dtawdsimisah. kitahtawd mana 
sdpwahtdtsi, uwikimdkana wawdsiyiwa. namuya kiskdyihtam tandhk 


‘Shtsi dh-wawdsiyit uwikimdkana. kitehtawd kuntah stpwdhtéhkasow, 


dh-matsit ; dkwah kdséw, “ mahtih kd-totahk,” dh~itdyimat.. potr dkwah 
kd-wdpamdt mistikwah dh-pah-pakamahwayit, dkwah ka-pdé-wayawiyit 

kindpikwa, kdé-wdadpamadt utrikimdkana dch-uwitsimustyit. sémdk mistaht 
kisiwdstw. mistikwah dh-pakamahwayit wiwa, “ nindpdm, dkwah nit- 


‘akuhtén ! * dtwaéyiwa. kisiwdsiw mistahi. uhtdyihtam ; ayisk usém 


nawals sakihimadwa kindpikwa. dyakunih shi kaé-wi-dtaydhkdtimak wisdh- 
kétsdhk ukadwiyah min ohtdwiyah. dkwah awa ndpdw mistahi kisiwdsiw ; 
nama kih-nipdw. * 

bmis dw wiwa: “ waihyaw niwih-tsi-maisin,” ildw wiwa., 

lapwd mituni wahyaw isi mdlsiw. payakutipiskwéw. 

“tandhki k-oh-katikuniyan ?” ittk uwikimakana. 

“waihyaw nik-isi-mdtsin,” itiw ; “ maka kiya kika-ndtén wiydsah,” 
idw wrwa. 

“dha,” itwdéw dw iskwdw. : 

mayaw d-sipwdahtayit wiwa, uskutakayiw utinam, dh-pustiskahk. ituhtaw 
ohi kinipikwah itah k-dsiwasuyit mistikuhk. , 

“nindpdm, nitakuhtén |” itéw kindpikwah. 

tapwah pd-wayawiyiwa. mohkumdn uhtsth kiskikwdsdwdtiw ; kiwaéh- 
tahdéw ohih kinépikwah ; mitsimadpuy usihtéw, dkwah katéw utawasimisah. 

tsikdmad maywds askiy thtakuhk, nandtuhk ist kisi-kaskiht@wak. kah- 

tdwindw utawdsimisah askihk. dkwah awah iskwiw mistahi kahkiyaw 
kway kaskihtdw, ahpoh kahkiyaw kdkway dsah a&h-pikiskwdatahk, dkusi 

asa d-naskuwasimikut. dkwah kahkiyaw kdkway mina népéw pihtsdyihk 
6tah k-chtakuniyik kitahamawéw aka kdkway kita-wihtamdkuyit. 

takuhtdyiwa dkwah wiwa. asamdw kindpikwa kd-kth-mitsimapohkakdt. 

“hwah, kakway éma,” tiwiw aw iskwiw, “ mistahih ka-wihkastk ? ” 

“kindpdm kindpik umihkuh, dkutowahk uhtsih k-dsthtamdtén, ” itéw. 

hisiwasiw aw iskwiw. 

“nama. tsi tinwé ahpoh dkus dh-totaman ? ”' itdw dsah. 

ituhléw iuéh mana kindpikwah ké-ntawdpamdt aw iskwéw. dkwah * 
pakamahwaw mistikwah. namwats kindpikwah pdé-wayawiyiwa. mistahi 
kisteasiw, kunt Gh~pé-mawthkatal. dh-pd-pihtukdt, undpdma kiskikwdtahuk. 
Gkus is dhpiskaw awa ndpéw, éh-tapasit. 

“ntawats olah kisikuhk nika-ntawih-utaskin. nikah-atsahkusiwin |” 
ttwéw, dh-atAsi-uhpiskat. 

dkwah awa iskwéw, kitahtawé tohkdépimakan Omah pisisik mistikwanis. 


” 


dkwah Miahtawé ké-pikiskwdét um Gstikwan. 


“4G, nitoydkan, taniwihkak ?” 

sdskwats kahkiyaw kakwitsimdw utdpatsihtsikanah. kahkiyaw mitunih 
ka@h-kitdtam, dh-kakwdtsihtahk.  pétih asiniya kaewihtamakut askthk ah- 
kih-kutdwindyit undpdma. niu kdkway kih-miydw utawdsimisah awa 
napdw, ispihk d-sipwdlisahtwdt, stpiy kit-dsthtayit, dkwah iskutdw, dkwah 
asiniwatsiy, dkwah sakdw, ukdminakastwi-sakdw. 


9 


dkwah iépwéw awa ustikwdnis awa. “! nlawdsimisitik, pahik! kikiti- 
mahindwaw kd-nakasiyak. 1” itwdw. - 
tahkth tépwdw awa iskwiw. dkwah awa n&pdais itamaskamik kay-isih~. 
tapasit, wihyaw uhtsih wipahtam éma pisisik mistikwan dh-pikiskwémakan- 
tytk, dh-nayémikut ustdsdh. 
dmis itaw: “ nistdsd, nama kdkway kikdwiyinaw.  ustikwan pikuh 
ké-pikiskwémakahk, ” itwéw a . 
ulindw ohiawiyah kd-kih-miyikut, iskutéw nahiyawak k-oh-osihtatsilet ; 
wapindw niway tsi. , ; 
“ Gtah iskuldw ta-uth-aydw |" itwaw. 
lapwéh mistahi nakdnikow awa, wahyaw uhisih iskuldw dy-isih-kwah- 
~ kutdyik. ayis pisisik ustikwdn pimuhtémakantyiw. dwaku pikuh ndhtyaw 
kah-isiythkasut dsah mats-Gyisah d-kih-witsihikut, pisisik ustikwan h-b- 
tihtipipayiyik. piyisk miydskam iskutdw. dkwah nawaswatéw sdsay mina 
ulawdsimisah. kahkiyaw saskitdyiwah wastakayah. ; . 
akwah minah kitahtawé Gh-ay-itapit ana kd-naydmiht awasis, namuya 
kikdwinaw, nisidsd ! kiydm séhkih tapasitan |” itéw. . 
dsay mina kihtwam utinam éhtéwiyah ka-kth-miyikut skaminakasiyi- 
walsiy kit-dsihtat. ndway isiwdpindw. tapwah atsisin aw ustikwan ka- 
tthicpipayiyit. adkwah atutéw misi-kindpikwah, kita-kah-kiskamayit ukam- 
inakasiya, kita-tawinamdkut, sdskwats kitazpimuhtat. , laépwi kaskihow 
séskwats dh-pimuhtdt, os 
dkwah dsay mina wdéhyaw dh-ttamutsik, dsay mina pdtisapaméw 
ustikwan dh-pd-tihtipipayiyit awa awdsis kd-nayémiht. day mina kd-kih- 
miyikut ohidwiyah asiniwatsiy kitd-dsihtat dsay mina ndway isiwépinam. 
mistahi misispayiw asiniwatsiy. - nama kth-kaskihow awa- ustikwanis 
_ ta-pasituhtdt. kwayask atuldw amiskwah:ta-pikwamayit chi asiniya, éh- 
piwapiskéwiyikih wipitiyiwa. dkwah kaskihéw sdsay mina. dsay mina 
nawaswildw utawdsimicah, 
dsay mina pdtisipamaw aw adwdsis kaé-nayémikut ustisoh.  adkwah 
mina sipiy kit-Gh-dsihtat kd-kih-miyikut Ghidwiya blah nikan pistsih isiwap- 
inam. | at-itwiw aw dwasis. matéwak dkwah, ah-kustahkik ta-nipahikutsik 
éma mistikwan ka-tihtipipayiyik, ukdwtwawa ustikwaniyiw. 
 dkwah Gh-mdtutsik, “ ékdya mdtuk | kika-pihkuhitindwaw !” itikwak 
misi-~kindpikwah. Lo . 
dkwah dsiwawihtkuk.?  dékwah akdémihk d-kih-takuhtahikutsik, kawih 
dsiwaham awa kd-kiy-dsiwawahat shi awdsisah. 
_ dh-wapamat dkutd awa mistikwan ka-tihtipipayit, 6mis itwéw : “ dsi- 
wawahin niya mina [" ttdw. ; 
“ dkéya maka papdsdyihtah ,” itik. 
ldpwd astwahuhth. péstw uspiskwaniythk. 
mudhisth tawaythk nipthk éh-ayatstk, “ misi-kindpik, wasd kipdsis- 
kan |” ttwiw aw iskwdw. . ; 
dkwah pakastawéhuk. . 
“ *namdw’ kik-dsiyihkdsun !” itk awa ustikwdn awa kd-tihtipipayit. 
ékwah oki népdsisak papémdtsthuwak, mistah d-kwdtakthtatsik. awakw 
Gwa utawasisiwihtay wisahkitsihk. 
Gkuspihk ékwah sipwihtiwak, usimisah éh-witsiwat. pakahatéwanisah | 
usthtamawéw, ta-mdtawakdéyitaB . 


? Word avoided, probably pusdkan : \birch-fungus, used as tinder.” 
? Probably for dsiwakuyikuk. 
cd 


10 


‘Kitahtawd tsikih sipihk dh-pa-pimuhtdtstk, dwaku usldsimds, “ dstam 1”? 
k-ditikut kisdyiniwa uldstythk dh-posiyit.  dh-pdsit, dkus ist isi-kwasthik. 
dkwah awa k-dpisisisit awa nakatik, 

dh-Gt-ist-mdlut, “ nistdsd, ntawdls niya nka-mahihkaniwin |” ttwdw 
awa napdsis usimimas. 

dkust dwaku pikuh kth-utinédw wisahkdtsahk, ékwah dkutd wikiythk 
dh-takuhtahikut ohi kisdyintwa. — kwatapinik utosiyihk ; namuya ahpoh 
wih-kiwahtayik. takuhtéw wikiwahk awa kisdyiniw, nisu uldnisa. 

“ ntawasimisitik, nipdsiwaw kit-siw-undpdmiydk ,”' itwéw dsa ; “ ntawd- 
pamihk ," itwéw. 

wayawiw Gh-umisimawit, dh-ntawapamat. mistah dtsik awa dh-mdaydl- 
“qgtytt. Pe ew 

“ namuye. ta-kih-undpdmiyan dwdsis |” tldw. 

“Gh, kdyiwéhk miyusiw. mdskots ahpoh usim mistah dh-malut, 
ttwdw asah. . 
dkwah ituhtéw usimimdw. awa uskinikiskwdw kiwdhtahdw anchih 
awdsisah, d-kih-kasihkwinat. pamihéw ; tdpwi undpdmiw dwaku. dkwah 
paktwatéw awa umisimdw, wawals mana uhtsitaw dh-titahk awa awasis, . 
éh-mistt utandskaniyihk, 

G-kih-néwu-tipiskaytk maka mis tdw: “ mahtth matotisinihkah ; 
nik-dsthtdn niyaw ," ttwdaw, 

tapwa matotisdnihkéwan, dw-usthiat wiyaw. adkwa’ mistahi miyusiw 
Gh-ahtsiyisul.  akawdtiw dkwah awah ka-ki-pakwatat. dtah kdtutatsth, 
. namwats ahpoh néhid-kitottk. dkwah awa kdsdyiniwit sthkimik ulanisah 
oh Smisimadwa si-kakwah-nipahdt. 

dkwah tépwéh, “ aha’ , nka-kakwd-nipahdw ,”’ itwiw awa kiséyiniw. 

“laniah dtukdé nikah-kih-uhtinin mistsikusah éh-miywasikih ?” itwdw 
awa uskinikiw. 

dkwah, “ nk-dtuhtahéw ninahahkisim ,” itwiw awa hisdyiniw. 

dkwah tipwa ituhtahédw dh-ministikowiyik. 

bmis itwdw awa kisdyiniw :. \‘ nipawakan, dwakw ana kitasamitin [” 
itwdw. 

. mayaw utati-sdskisihtay aw. “askintkiw, ka-pd-méskistékut wakaydsah, 
itowahk ka- wapiskisitsik. 

“¢ nika-nipohaw ,’ tsiw omah dh-itéyihtaman 7” idw awa; “nama 
ka-kih-nipahin ,”’ itwaw 5 3 “ayisk nista kipawdkanimitin ,”” ttwéw. 

tapwih nipahdw awa uskintkiw. ustikwaniyiw utinamwéw. kiwdhta- 
dw. dsiskawdw Ohi kiséyiniwa ; waskits nipthk ati-pimuhtdw, dah-kiwdt 
awa kisdyiniw, kd-wdpahtahk wdkayés ustikwén dh-akuléyik uliskwah- 
timihk ; maka wiya kisdyiniw. mawthkatéw updwdkanah, éh-nipahimiht. 

asay mina kitahtawéh dh-ay-dydisik, 6misitwéw aw askintkiw : “ tantah 
dtuké prnaw-uhting ak mikwanak ah-miyusitsik, nipisisah kit-6hts-dsih- 
tdyan 

“6tah 6mah k sintwatsiwik, Gkuld mistaht mz iyusiivak mikwanak. 
Ghuté nik-diuhtahaw , {' itwéw awa. a eee 

ldpwa sipwahtahd dkuté ist. dkusi dhutd ah-takuhtahdt, piydsrwa 
Gh-uwatsistwaniyit. 

“haw, nipawakanitik, dwakw dna kitasamitindwaw |” itdw. 
dkusi isi-kiwdw. dsay mina kahkiyaw nipahdw shih piydsiwah. 


1 In the ensuing episodes he is spoken of not by name, but as “that youth.” 


\ 


il | . 
dsay mina, “ tGnidh dtuké nkah-kih-uhtinin nipisty dh-miywdst > kite 
Osthak 7” - 


dkust sdsay minah kisdéyiniw, “ nk-dtuhtahéw itih ah-miywdsiniytk - 


nipisiyah.” 

ldpwd ttuhtahdw. 

dsay mina, ‘ 
pikwah. 

; Gsay mina awa uskinikiw k-dsamimiht misi-kindpikwah nipahéw. 
ustikwaniyiw kiwihtataw. dsay mina kisdyiniw naéway takuhtiw, mawth- 
kdléw mina upawdkanah. , 

“ misi-kindpik, nipawdakan |” ttwdw. 

dkwah namuya kih-kiskdyihtam tan 
ta-k-isi-nipahdt, ahpéh ta-kawatimat. 

dkwah mis tlwéw : “ matstldn; ntahkwah) 1” itéw. 

tapwa malsiwak. dh-tipiskayik iyikuhk, nipahédwak méswoh. 

“wah Ipiku ta-nipdyahk | kimisi-kawdtapdwandnaw |” 

kisupwamispumiyiw. : 

“ nasdtan kitayowinisinawa !” itdw. 

lapwd pdsamuk, mituni mistahi ah-pénahkik minahikuskahk. mayaw 
dh-kiskéyimat unahahksimah dh-nipdyit, utinamwdw utaydwinisiyiwa ka- 
kih-akutéyit. kahkiyaw méstihkasamwdw. ‘ 

“ kdkway kd-saskitdk ? kitaydwinisah mastihkahtéwah !” 

“ hah, ayisk kiwi-kakwd-nipahin | — itap nika-mésowin 1” itwiw awa 
uskinikiw. 

ntuméw, dh-ati-sipwahtét awa kiséyintw kisinwah. tapwi mistahi 
kisindw. ayisk ntomaéw. dkwah awah uskinikiw kiwéw. dsiskawdw usisah ; 
mosowiw, dh-kiwat. ; 

dkwah, “ téndhki?” ittk wiwa. 

“ kohtawiy dh-wih-kakwa-nipahit, kahkiyaw ntaydwinisah kih-mdstch- 
kasam.” 

tékuhtat awa kiséyiniw, apiwah unahahkisima. kihkdmik uldnisa. 

“tanahki mina k-6-mdstihkasamwat kitihkwatim utaydwinisah ?”’ 
itik ufénisa. . ° 

“ha, Gh-kiskwéhkwastyan,” itwéw awa kisdyiniw. 

“ mahti pdyakwaw dsay mina !” ildyihtam awa kisdyiniw. “ ninahdh- 
kistm, mahti mdtsitan [” itdw. . 

tapwd mdtsiwak. 

“ namuya ta-kih-kiwdyahk 1” itéw sdsay.mina. 

iyikuhk dh-tipiskdyik, nipahiwak méswah. 

“kiyam ka-kapdsinanaw,” ttwéw awa kisdyiniw ; “ kika-pdsénanaw 
kitayswinisinawa ,” — “kihkihk dkust nka-kakwd-isi-nipahaw , ” Gh- 
itdythtahk awa kisdyinw. : 

dkwah akutawak a-kih-ponahkik utayowinisiwawa. mayaw aGh-nipdyit, 
awa uskinikiw nihtinam kahkiyaw ulaydwinisah. wah kd-nipdt astdw. 


3 dkwah kita-kth-isi-kawatimdt 


1 Literally, “my sister’s son (man speaking); my brother's son, my husband’s sister’s 
-gon (woman speaking),’” often, as here, for nahdhkis : “gon-in-law.” Similarly, nists: 
“my mother’s brother” for ‘my father-in-law” (See below), and nisikus: “my father’s 
sister; my mother’s brother’s wife” for “my mother-in-law,” both of these being more 
specifically mandlsimdkan : “person one dare not address, parent-in-law.” And nahéhkan- 
iskwdw: “daughter-in-law” is little used beside nistim: ‘my sister’s daughter (man 
speaking); my brother’a daughter, my husband’s sister’s daughter (woman speaking).” 


‘ad, nipawdkan, hiwakuh kitasamitin |” itéw misi-kind- 
A 


12 
dkwah hindyintw waniskéw. pasakwapiw, kuntah &-kiskwahkwasthkasut. 


wiya kdsdyiniwit kdhtisiwdk utayowinisah kahkiyaw mdstihkasam. 

“ kakway ka-ktaitak ?" itdw. 

“ohi niya k-dstikih ntayéwinisah ,” itwdw awa dskinikiw; " kiy 
dlukd kihtsiwak kitayowinisah kd~pénaman ,” itdw ohi kisdyiniwa ; va ayisk 
dkusi kikih-tétawin ; nista maka dkus tsi kik-dsi-nakatitin. ” 

“ cha’ | itip dtuké nka-mésowin 1” itwéw awa kisdyiniw. 

nama kaskihtaw kite-méséwit.. ntumdw kisinwa awa wisahkdtedhk. 
nipahdw bhi kisdyiniwa. 

mitsikd dkwah nétukdsiw népahimtht undpaéma mistahi kisiwdsiw. 

“ kika-nélinitundnaw |” itiw unahdkisima ; ‘ ahkamasiniy dkutéwahk 
niwaw ka-nimahutin ; dkutah ké-pakamahutan 1” itwdw awa notukdsiw. 

niwiw dh-nimahwat nadpiwa,' utinamiyiwa; ustikwan uhtsih pik- 
walahamiyiwa. mina dwaku nipahtk. 

dkust dkwah awa kutak uskintkiskwaw, mina dwakuh nipahtk, dkust 
kahkiyaw dh-nipahikuisik. matsikah aydwak dkutah wisahkdtsahk. 

dkwah sipwahtaw, éh-péhiahk usima kd-kih-mahthkaniwiytt éh-nipahik- 
uyit idmi-nipihk k-dtaskiytt nandtuhk misi-pisiwah? mina misi-kindpikwah. 
dkwah mistaht kistwdsiw. 

“tdnie dtukd nikah-ttén ‘itmi-nipthh kit-dtuhtdyan 7” 

ké-wapamat usima, itah G-kth-nipahtstkdsuyit, nipthk mana aheay- 


‘ttapit, Gh-ukimawiyit kinusdwah utiskwahtdmiyihk dh-akutsiniyit, mistahi 


pakwatam. kitahtawéh ituhidw ; natawi-~pimwaw ohi k-dkimawiyit kinusd- 
wah. papdmuhtéw dékus ist. kitahtawa ka-wapandt aytkisah. 

“tandhki? ” ttdéw. 

“hd, nnatawi-nipiskdydn ,”’ itwdw awa ayikis 

“ tanist kd-tétaman, wih-nipiskdyani ?" itwéw twa wisahkdtsahk. 

&-kth-wihtamdkut, nipahéw 6hi. naspitamohisok; usthiséw t-dyikisi- 
wit. h. ituhtéw dkwah’ ka-kanawdyihtsikaswyit kd-mihkusiyit. mahthkaniway- 
dna 

mayaw gh-pthtukdt, “tawistahk ! dwakw dkwa ka- th-pa-pimatsihat 
6hi wisahkdtsdhkwah kakth-pimwayit ," itaw. 

ldpwd tawistawdw. dy-isi-ttawat Ohi ké-ntawi-nina 
lapwa sohkih kihtsitanam dma. atsusis. 

“kdkway itahk ayikis ka-nipiskét ! mistah dma hkikisiwahi 
nisim Gh-kih-nipahdydk !” itwiw wisahkatsahk. 

tapasiw dkus ist. 

“kikisiwdhawak matsi-pisiskiwak pr itik manitowa ; “ soth-iskipdw 
askiy. kahkiyaw pah-pdyak pisiskiwak étinah, nandtuhk ka-papamihatsik. 
Gh-misak Osi usthtah ,”’ itik. 

dkuspthk dsa maywas tskipdk oma askiy, kahkiyaw kdkway dsah ukth- 
motuhtiawaw pisiskiwak.  ahpoh paskwawi-mustuswak ki-méwdwak ayisi- 
yiniwah, tydtah-aydyitsih. dkusi kiy-(spayiw dsah. kahkiyaw pah-pdyak 
utindw uisahkdtsahk nah-nis ohtsth, paydk napéw-dyisah, kiskisisah. kah- 
kiyaw ké-papdmihdyit, mina, dtah askihk misiwé ka-ppamuhiayit, kahkiyaw 
nah-nisu uhtsi utindw. dkusi usihtaw dh-misdyik ost. dkusi kih-wani- 
tipiskayiw dsa. dkust kahkiyaw atahkwak namuya uhts thiakéwak. misiwd 
Kih-iskipaytw askiy, &-kth-kisthtat dh-misayik osi. dkwah misiwd dy-iski- 


payik, kahkiyow asiniwatsiyah dh-dyiwakipdyikih, dkwah papamahukowak, 


1 The Blackfoot name. . 
* Special mention of lynxes is perhaps to be discounted, as a compliment to me, who 
am called misi-pisiw_:_ ‘Great Lynx.” 


disihat, dkwah 


13 


piyisk wi-nipahahkatusow. wiwa nipahahkatusdyiwa, dkwah dmisi kahkiyaw 
kwayah nipthk k-dtaskiyit mats-dyisah d-with-kakwd-nipahikut, tydtah- 
pdy-ituhtdyitet dh-nipahdt, piyisk kehkiyaw kikwayah kustik. adkwah 
Kitahtawd ked-manitéwah kd-pakitsitutakut. 
Omis itik: “ kispin aka kth-kahtsitinamand asiskiy, dkusi namuya 
wihkats kit-chkipayiw 6ma nipiy ,” itik. . 
ndmitanaw dskutoskwanéhk itah dh-péhkwasik ; misiwd dsah kiy- 
iskipdpan, © ; 
“ dkwah tanisi kd-totaman ?” itéyihtam Gta wiya. 
ayisk kahkiyaw kth-pdsihdw pisiskiwah.  kitahtawéh atutéw makwa, 
ta-kakwéh-utinamiyit asiskiy. pétih namwats kih-kaskihtayiwa. Mitahtawd 
mina atutdw nikikwah. namwats kaskihtayiwa. kahkiyaw tahtuh kd-nihta- 
kokiyit dta dh-atutdt, namwats kth-kdhisitinamiyiwa asiskiy.  kttahtawd 
watsaskwah atutaw. nama mayaw miunih takuhtéyiwa. dwakuni apisis 
kith-kikamuyiw asiskiy. dsay mina kihtwém sthkimdw. dsay mina pdtdyiwa. 
ndwaw. sipwéhtisahwdw kita-ndtamiyit asiskiy. ; 
“ dkuytkuhk {” itik manitowa. , 
Gkutah uhtst ki-miyikowisiwak ayisiyiniwak néhiyawak, uskate askiy 
dtah ch-aydtsik. dkusi kahkiyaw nipiy nama takun dkwa kahkiyaw. 
dkusit sipwdhtéw dkutah uhtst wisahkdtsahk. dkwah wiyaséwatdw 
ayisiyiniwah kit-Gwitsdwakantytt, d-wih-usthdt manitéw.  asiskiy whtsih 
usithdw nisu ayisiyiniwah. dkwah.maywds apahkawihat napdwa, uspikd- 
kaniytwa iskwaydnithk pah-pdyak uhtsih utinamwdw, dkwah k-apéhkawihat. 
,mistam dh-pikiskwat ayisiyiniw, d-kih-usihiht, “nipiy 1” kth-itwaw 
dsah. i 
kihtwaém dh-pikiskwat, “ nimitsiwin 1" kih-itwéw dsah. 
kahkiyaw kékway nama kékway uhtsi kustikuk. naipdw ki-wihaw 
dsah, “umithtikés!” k-ist-wihéw nistam napdw. dkwah iskwéw. niwu 
kiy-Ghawak, pah-pitus dh-isi-wahkéhtutsik. J 
dkutah ékwah ki-sipwéhtisahwdw nistam kahkakiw, kahkiyaw: askiy 
G-wasakamét. pitih nisawats kih-aséndw2 dkwah kihtw ki-sipwéhtisahwaw,. 
ékutah uhtsih nama wihkdts dsah kth-nipiwak ayisiyiniwak.  pdyahtik 


kih-kdmwdtsth-pimdtisiwak, piyisk dh-atth-mthtsdtitsik. ki-miskamwak 
lanist dh-isi-pimatsthutsik. Gkutah uhtsi ka-pdw-uhpikihitut néhiyaw, 
ayisiyiniw. ° 


nandtuhk ayisiyiniw kahkiyaw ninisituhtén 6ma ké-ntawdyihtakwahk 
dtsimowin. . nahiyaw tdnisi ay-isi-pimdlisit, é-kth-pdy-isih-uhpikihitutsik 
nihiyawak, kahkiyaw nikiskdyihtdn. mina wdpiski-wiyds Gtah kd-paih- 
takuhiatat ayamihdwin, kahkiyaw min dék6 nikiskdyihtan, tanisi ah-pdh- 
isth-wthistkatayik. Ghisitaw nitdtaydhkdtan nistam ayistyiniw, tanisi 
G-kih-tsih-usthisikdsul ndhiyaw. | maskots dkutéwahk kd-ntawdyihisikatak, 
madskéts céh-nuhta-kiskdéyihtamihk néhiyaw upimatisiwin, dy-itéyihtaman, 
k-6h-isth-Gtayéhkdyan. i ‘ 

niswaw mitdtahtumitanaw askiy d-kih-ispayik, adkuspthk dsa uki- 
nipahikwah wdkayésah dwakuh nistam ayisiyiniw, dsah éh-kth-nipit. 
déwakuh niyandn kd-ndhiyawiydhk onipiwah utsdhisdhkuyiwah ta-kanawdy- 
imat kih-itasé6watik,dsa manitéwa. matwdn tsi kdydpits ékust ispayiw ; 


1 The word is in Ojibwa form. 
*Or read kth-asihaw: “he flew back.” 


83186-—2 ‘ 


14 


namuya nika-kth-itwan. ayisk usim ninistwandtsthisundn. kth-kita- 
hamowdaw ayisiyiniw aka kit-ayamthat ; dwakuh uhtst kdh-ttwdydn. 
“néhiyaw kay-isiythkdsut pikuh kay-itak : dkayah ayamihahkan ! 
namuya kiya kd-miyilan. ntawdsimisah uhisitaw nimiydw wapiski-wiyds, 
kita-kakwdtakihut, wiya d-kih-nipahat ntawdsimisah ,” kihatwdéw dsah 
manitow. 
ékuykikuhk éyakiw pdyak pikiskwdwin. 


Once upon a time, long ago—I am now telling a sacred story—once 
upon a time, of old, a certain man dwelt in a Jone lodge with his wife and 
his two childran. ‘Then presently, whenever he went away, his wife put 
on her finery. He did not know why his wife put on her finery. So then 
at one time he merely preterided to go away to hunt; he hid himself, 
thinking of her, “Let me’ see what-she will do.” And then he saw her 
beating a tree, and a serpent came out,.and he saw that his wife had it 
for a lover, at once he was very angry. When his wife struck the tree, 
she said, ““My husband, now I have come!” He -was very angry. He was 
jealous; for the serpent was loved more than he. Those of whom I mean to 
tell the sacred story were Wisahketchahk’s mother and father. So now 
that man was very angry; he could not sleep. ae 


He said to his wife: “I am going far away to hunt.” - me 
He really went very far away to hunt. He stayed over one night. 


‘Why did you stay out over night?” his wife asked him. an 


Ns 


“J have been far off to hunt,’’ he told her; “But you, you are to 
fetch the meat,’’ he told his wife. 

“Very well,” said she. or . 

As soon ag his wife had gone, he took her skirt and put it on. He went 
to where that serpent was inside the tree. 

“My husband, I have come!’’ he said to the serpent. 

Really, it came out. He cut through its neck with a knife; he took - 
the serpent home; he made broth. Then he hid his children. 

One must keep in mind that before the earth existed they had many - 
kinds of power. He plunged his two children into the ground. And that 
woman, too, had great power for all things, and could talk even to every 
kind of thing and accordingly receive answer from it. And then the man 
forbade every object that wee in their dwelling to tell her anything. 

Then his wife arrived. He gave her the serpent to eat which he had 
cooked into broth. . 

“Oh, what is this,” asked the woman, ‘which tastes so good?” 

“The blood of your husband, the serpent; from Yt I have made this 

t 


. for you,” he told her. 


The woman was angry. - on 
“It is not true, is it, that you have done even this?” she asked him: 


She went to where she was in the habit of visiting the serpent. Then 
she struck the tree. The serpent did not come out. She was very angry, 
as she came back, loudly bewailing it. When she entered the dwelling, 
her husband cut off her head. Then he rose into the air, to flee. 


\ 


~ 


15 


“T shall needs go dwell there in the sky. Let me be a star!” he gaid, 
as he rose higher and higher. 

And that woman, that severed head presently opened its eyes. Then 
presently that head spoke. 

“Come, my dish, where are they?” 

Without delay, she asked all her utensils. She spoke to every single 
one in turn, questioning it. At last a stone told her that her husband had 
sunk them into the earth. Four things that man had given his children, 
at the time when. he started them off; that they might make a river, fire, 
a mountain of stone, and a forest; a forest of thorn-trees. 

Then that head began to call. ‘My children, wait for me! You are 
making me wretched by leaving me!’ it cried. 

That woman called all the time. And that little boy who was fleeing 
under ground, from afar he saw that severed speaking head, as he waa 
being carried on his elder brother’s back. 

He said to him, “Big brother, our mother is not there. It is only a 
talking head,’’ he said. 

He took that which his father had given him, that from which the 
. Cree make fire; he threw it behind him. 

“Let there be fire here!” he said. 

And ‘really that being was entirely brought to a stop, when far and 
wide the fire blazed. For it was but a severed head which went along. 
Because he, at any rate, who is called-Indian was helped by evil beings, 
was why that severed head could roll along. Finally it passed the fire. 
Then it again pursued its children. All its hair was aflame. 

Then presently when again that child looked about, who was being 
borne by the other, “It is not- our mother| big brother! Let us flee with all 
our might!” he tald.him. 

Again he took that which his father had given him that he. might make 
a hill of thornberry-trees. He threw it behind him. That Rolling Skull 
was really blocked. Then it bade a Great Serpent to bite through the 
thorn-trees and make a passage through for it, that it might go unchecked. 
And so it managed to go on, unchecked. 

Then, when again they had fled a long ways, again that child who was 
being carried saw the Skull come roiling. And again, he threw behind them 
that which he had béen given by his father that he might make a mountain 
of rock. Vastly that rocky crag extended. That Skull-Being could not 
manage to go-across it. At once it employed a beaver with iron teeth to 
bite that rock to pieces. Then it was able again to go on. Again it pursued 
its children. 

Again that child who ‘was being borne by his elder -brother saw it 
coming. Then that which his father had given him that he might make a 
river, he threw it, by mistake, on ahead. The child kept erying its ery. 
Then they wept in. terror that the Rolling Skull would kill them, their 
mother’s skull: 

Then, as they wept, “Do not weep! I will take you to safety!” a 
Great Serpent said to them. 

Then he carried them across the water. When he had brought them 
to the far shore, he crossed back, who had taken those children across, 


8318623 


' 16 


When the Rolling Skull saw him, it said, “Take me across, tool” it i 
said to him. . 

“But do not be impatient” he told it. 

So he carried it across. It rode on his back. 

Just when they were in the middle of the stream, “Great Serpent, 
you are going altogether too slowly!” said that woman. 

‘Then he threw her into the water. - 

“ ‘Sturgeon’ will be your name!’’ he told that Rolling Head. 

Then -those boys wandered about, suffering many hardships. That 
boy was Wisahketchahk in his childhood. 

Then they departed from there, he with his. little brother. He made 
a ball for him to play with. 

Then at one time, as they were walking by the river, the elder boy 
was told, ‘(Come here!”’ by an old man in a canoe. When he stepped into 
the canoe, ‘this person carried him off. They left the smaller boy behind. 

Then as he began to weep, “Big brother, now I shall have to turn 
‘ into a wolf!” cried that little boy, the younger one. 

Thus only Wisahketchahk was taken, and thé old man brought him 
over yonder to his dwelling. .He put him under his canoe as he tipped it 


on the beach; he did not even care to take him home. The old man went . 


to his abode, to his two daughtérs. 

“My children, I have brought someone for you to marry,” ‘he said; 
“Go look at him,” he said. 

The older girl went out of the tent and looked at him. Why, he was — 
very ugly! 

- *“T cannot marry a child!” she said of him. 

“Oh, he is handsome enough. Perhaps it is only because he has been 
weeping too much,” he said. 

‘Then the younger sister went there. This young woman. brought the 
lad home, after washing his face. She took care of him; she really took , 
him for her husband. The elder sister disliked him, and all the more so 
as the child wantonly played tricks, . . é, 


On the fourth night, however, he said to them, “Do y you 1 build a lodge 
for the steam-bath; 1] shall make my body,”’ he said. 

Accordingly a sweat-lodge was built for him, and he made his body. 
Then he was very handsome, when he had made himself over. ‘Then she 
who had disliked him conceived a passion for him. But even though she. 
plied him with speech, he did not care to have her so much as speak to 
him. Then’ the old man was urged by that elder daughter of his to try - 
and kill him. 

And really, ‘Yes, I shall try to kill him, said the old man. 

“L wonder -where I can get good little arrow-sticks?” said the youth. 

“Then, “I shall take my son-in-law to such a place,” said the old man. 

And so he took lim to an island. 

; pes § spoke the old man: “My dream guardian, I feed you this man!” 
1e sai 

Hardly had the youth gone into the brush, when out-came a bear at 
him, one of those who are white: 

"OT shall kill him,’ is that what you are thinking?” said he; “You 
cannot kill me,” he said; ‘For 1;to0, have you as my dream spirit,’’ he 
said. 


17 


The youth really slew it. He took its head. He took it home with 
him. He outdistanced tho old man; he walked along on the surface of 
the water. When the.old man went home, there he saw the bear’s head 
hanging over the doorway; the old man bewailed his dream guardian who 
had been slain. 

Presently, as they dwelt there, the youth spoke thus: “I wonder 


’ where I can get pretty feathers to make my arrows?” 


“Qver yonder amid the rocky cliffs, there the feathers are very fine, 
I shall take him there,” said the old man. 

’ Really, he led him off, to go there. And so he brought him there 
where the Thunderers had their nests. 

“Come, my dream guardians, I feed you this man!” he said to’ them. 
a With that he turned to go home. Again, he killed all those Thun- 

erers. 

Once more, “T wonder where I can get a good osier to make my how?” 

eqn again, the old man: “TI shail take him where the willows ¢ are 
good 

Really, he took him there. 

Again, “Come, my dream guardian, this one I feed to: youl”? he said 
to a Great Serpent. 

And again, the youth slew the Great Serpent to whom he was heing 
fed, He took home its head. Again the old man was the second to arrive. 
He grieved over this dream. spirit, too. - 

“Great Serpent, my dream guardian!” he cried. 

Then he did not know how he could freeze him to death, to kill him, 
but by freezing: him. 

So he said, ‘‘Let us hunt, my nephew!” he said to him. ' 

Accordingly, they went hunting. . At nightfall, no sooner, they killed 
& moose. 

5 “Pshaw! We shall have to sleep out! We are. soaked through to the 
one!” 

It was a warm-weather snowstorm. 

“Let us dry our clothes,” he said to him. 

So they dried them, feeding up a huge fire in a cedar-grove. As soon 
as he knew that his son-in-law slept, he took the latter‘s clothes from where 
he had hung them. He burned them all. 

“What is that burning? Your clothes have burned up!” 

“Hah, of course, for you are trying to kill me!—So then I shall turn 
into a moose!” said the youth. 

' As the old man went away, he called the Cold. And really, it "grew 
very cold. For he had called it. Then that youth went home. He out- 
‘distanced his uncle; he was in the form of a moose, as he went home. 

Then, “Why thus?” his wife asked him. 

“Because your father is trying to kill me, he burned up all my clothes.” 

When the old man arrived, his son-in-law sat there. His daughter 
upbraided. him. 

“Why now did you burn up your nephew’s clothes?” his daughter 
asked him. . 

“Oh dear, because I was walking in my sleep,’’ . said the old man. 

“Let me try once more!” thought the old man. “My son-in-law, let 
us hunt!” besaid to him. 

Accordingly, they went hunting. . 


18 


“We shall not be able to go home!” he said to him, again. 

Not before nightfall they killed a.moose. 

“Let us camp,” said the old man; ‘We shall dry our elothes,” for, 
“Tn spite of all, I shall try to kill him this way,” thought the old man. 


as the other slept, the youth took down all of his own garments. He put 
them dowh where he slept. Then the old man got up. He squinted from 
under his eyelids, pretending to walk in his sleep. The old man himself 
burned up all his own clothes, . . 

“What is that burning?” he asked him. 

“Here are my clothes, lying here,’ ’ said the youth; “T daresay it is 
your own clothes you have put in the fire,” he said to the old man; ‘But 
secing that you did it to me, I too shall now leave you, as you left me, ” 

“Very well! I suppose I shall then turn into a moose!” said the old 

_ man, . 

But he did not succeed in turning into a moose. Wisahketchahk 
called the Cold. He killed the old man. 

Of course the old woman now was very angry, when her husband 
had been killed. 

“We shall fight!” she said to het son-ift-law; “With fhis pounding- 
stone four times I shall. threaten you; then I shall strike you!” said the 
old woman. 

When for the fourth'time she held it over Napiw as if to strike, he took 
it; he smashed her head with it. He killed her too. 


Thereupon that other young woman, her, too, he killed: So he killed . 


- them all. Of course Wisahketchahk and the other stayed there. 


W@W 


Then he set out, for he heard that his little brother who had turfied 
into a wolf had been slain by the various Great Panthers and Great Ser- 
pents that dwell under water. He was very angry 

‘“_ wonder what I shall do to go under the water!” . 

When he saw, as he always looked into the waters, his: little brother, 
where he had been slain by them all, hanging over the doorway of the 
Chief Fish, he was filled with grief and hate. Presently he went there; he 

. went and shot with an arrow that Chief Fish. Then he wandered about. 
. Presently he saw a frog. 
“What is your errand?” he asked it. 
—_ “Why, I am going to doctor by breathing,” said the frog. 
F “What do you do, when you are ‘breath-doctoring?” asked Wisah-~ 
\ ketchahk. 
When it told him, he killed it. He turned himself into its form; he 
made himself to be a frog. He went to where they kept the Red Wolfskin. 

As soon as he entered, ““Make way for this person! This is the one. 

who has come to cure him whom Wisahketchahk has shot with an arrow,’ 


was said of him. wf 


Accordingly, they made way for him. When he was treating him 
whom he ha me to tend, then, truly, with a vim he thrust in that 
arrow. 

“What is that about a frog would be breathing on wounds! Rather, 
you have angered me much by: _dfling ma my little brother!” cried Wisahket- 
chah 

Then he fled. 


Then, after feeding up a fire, they hung-up their clothes. As soon. —_ 


¥. 


J 
a 


oe. 
pple: . 


ot 
BG 


19 - 


we. 
a 


“You have enraged the evil beasts!”. the Lord told him; pe earth ~~~ - 


will be flooded. Take one each of every beast, and of all those who fly. 
Build a great canoe,” He told him. 

At that time, we are told, before this earth was flooded, all kinds of 
‘animals ate each other. Even the buffalo ate men, no’matter where they 
were. That is the way things were. Wisahketchahk took one of every 
kind, in pairs, one male and one female. Of all who fly and ofaall who 
walk about this earth, of each he took two. Then he built a great canoe. 
Then deep darkness cime. All the stars ceased to be. Everywhere the 
earth was flooded, when he had finished the great canoe. Then, when the 
flood was everywhere, and all the mountains of rock were submerged, then 
they drifted about. At last he nearly starved to death. His wife starved 
to death. Then, when all the creatures that dwell in-the water, the evil 
beings, tried to kill him, when in vain they came'there, and he slew them, 
then at last all creatures feared him. Presently God descended to him. 

Thus He spoke to him: “If you cannot scrape up some earth, then 
never will these waters recede,” He told him. 

It was forty cubits to the bottom; the flood had covered all. 

“Now how am J to do?” he thought, none the less. 

But he had all the beasts on his ship. Presently he bade the loon 
try to take up sonfe soil. It turned out quite unable. Then presently he 
employed the otter. It was entirely unable to do it. “Although he employed 
all, as many as are good divers, they could not at all scrape up any earth. 
Then in time he sent the muskrat. It was a long time coming back. A 
little earth was sticking to it. Again he bade it go. Again it brought some. ’ 
Four times he sent it off to fetch earth. . 

“Tt is enough!”’ the Spirit told him. 


Thus it was that the Indians were given this by the spirit powers, © ~~ 


that first they had an earth here. For then all the water ceased to be. 

Then Wisahketchahk. went away from here. Then the Spirit decreed 
that he was to have man as a companion, and decided to create man. He 
made two humani beings of earth. Then before He brought the men to 
life, from each of them He took the lowest rib, and then He brought them 
to life. ; “ . 

When man first spoke, after'being created, we are told that he said, 
“Water!” . 

When he spoke aguin, we are told that he said “My food!” 

They were/feared by all creatures, for no cause. Then the man was 


riamed. “Dugiout-Canoe” the first man was named. Then the woman. 


Four of them dWelt there, being in different wise related, so as to make a 
family. 

t hen from there the raven was first sent out to make the circuit of 
. the earth. In the outcome he was needs rejected. Then the eagle was 
sent out. . - 

In the time that began then, people never died. They lived quietly 
and undisturbed, until at last they came to be many. They found how 
to keep themselves alive. From that time to this-in successive generations 
has come the Cree, the Indian. 

Of all the different peoples I understand this story which is desired. 
Of how the Cree lived, as the Cree have conge.@dwn through the gener- 
ations to this time, all of this I know. And of'the Christian wé?ship which 
the white man has brought here with him, of this, too, 1 know all, of how 


ou 
sees 


< 


) 20 us 
it has been announced to this time. I have chosen to tell the sacred story 
of how the first man was created, the Indian. Because I have thought 
that doubtless this is what is desired, that doubtless people wish to know 
of the life of the Indian, that-is why I tell this sacred story. ' 

When twice a hundred years had gone by, at that time, this first 
man was killed by a bear, and so he died. Then, we are told, he was 
assigned by the Spirit to care for the souls of the dead of us who are Indians. 
I question if it is.still so; I cannot say. For too greatly are we destroying 
ourselves. The Indian was forbidden to practise the Christian religion; 
that is what I mean. 

“I say this only to him who is called Indian: thou shalt not worship 
in Christian wise! Not to thee do I give this. I give my Son to the white 
man, that he may suffer for having slain my Son,” said the Lord. 

So much for this discourse. 


’ 


(2) Wisahketchahk, the Partridges, and the Stone 
sakdwdw. Adam, Sakewew 


kitahtawé sipwahtdw utsahkdtsahk. ,kitahtawé wapamdw usk-dytsisah 
waisistwanthk pihdsisah. Cc 

“ nisimilik, pihdtik, tinist dsiyihkdsuydk ? ” 

“\dtah kiwthinan, ‘ pthdwak’ k-dtwiyin; dkusi pikuh dy-isiythkasu- 
yahk.” . 

“namuya !” itwéw wisahkdtsahk ; “kahkiyaw kakway niswayak 
isiythkataw. " 

“namuya ,” itik ; “ dkust pikuh, ‘ pihéwak,’ dy-isiyithkdsuyahk. ” 

“namuya, nistmitik | md-mitundythtamuk ; kutak minah wihawin 
kitayanawaw. "' 

Gkusi awah usidsimads umis itdw: “ dta wiya mana nikdwiy nohtawiy, 
‘ukuskuhiwdsisak’ kitisiythkdsunénaw, dkwah ‘ pihdwak ;’ kinisuythkas- 
unanaw,’ niikunén mdna.”° 

“isay ! nitakis oki kuskuhiwdtsik !” itéw, ah-misit ustikwaniyihk, 
Gh-piwdyimat ; “nama ta-ki-kuskuhiwdyadk !” itéw; “nam dwiyak ka- 
ki-sékthawadw !” itdw. ; 

Gkust nakatdw. dkwah oki pihdwak Gh-kiwdisik, awdn ohi utawdsi- 
misituawa ! kih-mdyiwiyiwah ustikwaniyihk. . 

“tanihk um, nitawasimisitik, k-dh-isindkusiyak, dh-withtsékisiydk ?” 
iutkwak ékdwiyiwdwah ohtawiyiwawah mina. ; 

“wiy Gna utsahkatsahk d-kakwétsimikuyahk, ‘tanisi dsiyihkasuydk, 
msimitik, pihatik ?’ dh-itikuydhk, aka é-wihtaméwayahk, ‘ dta kusa kiwih- 
inan,’ Gh-atdyahk, ‘ namuya ; kahkiyaw kikway nisuythkataw,'’ nitikundn. 
piyisk nivihtamawdw, ‘ ukuskuhiwdstsak nitisiyihkdsunan, ’ éh-itak, ‘ ntakis 
oki kuskuhiwatsik,’ k-dtikuyahk, dh-misit nistikwaninahk. dkusi adspin kd- 
stpwahtat, dh-pahpit. " ‘ 

“haw, niwikimdkan, sipwéhid. méka mina sipisis utihtahkih, ékutah 
ka-wawiyasthdnaw, ‘wtakis oki sdkihiwdtsik,’ k-dtat kitawdsimisinawa ; ~ 
kandhkawdtan. ” 

tapwd pihdwah mawihkatéwak, éh-mawatsihitusik. dkwah kitahtawéd 
ké-wapahtahk sipisis é-sakdyik. dkwah Gyttaw ayitawakam pihéwak apiwak 
dkutah, éh-kasétsik. , . : 

» ) . ne 


\ K-dsiwépindt. - dkwah pa-wayatsawiw ; nakiw. 


21 


; dkwah wisahkdtsahk utihtam stpisis. wdsdkamiyiw. dkust d-wapah- 
tahk, mustuswayanah akwanahéw ; dkwah pahkdkin uskutakay ; dkwah 
pahkdkin utasah, . 
dkwah umis itwdw: ‘ mahtih’? — sdhki pikiskwdw — “ iskikanth 
usk-dyth astutin astwdtuhk, usk-dyah aydwintsah, ‘awiyak dstwakdmd- 
uhpitsth, kit-ayadw Ghih,’ itwahk. -nistwaw nika-néimiskdn ; dkutah nédwaw 
mwdhist nik-uhpin, ” itwadw.. . . 
nituhtak Ohi pihdwah ; maka namuya wapamdw. dfwah kuspuhtéw. 
* atsiyaw nika-wapikatan, ” itwiw ; disimustawdw ‘lanisi dh-wih- 
tolahk. 
_dkwah wahyaw nipawiw ; utakuhpah étah ahdw ; tapiskawdw. adkwah 
pdé-wayatsdwiw ; sisund sipisisthk naki-kwéskuhtiw. 
“ yohah, nahpihisis nika-sdpupahdw, néhtdpayiydnih,” itwaw ; “ aka- 
mthk ntéstwaépindw, " 9 _ wot 
. utindw wahpthtsisah ; namuya kanawdpamdw, omist c&h-isiwdpindt ; 
akamihk pahkisiniyiwa. Uh-wdpindt, pdyak pihkdwa k-uhpahuyit? ; 
“yohu, mana tdpwé nka-kuskuwihtkuh 1” ttwdw. Con 
“ Gkwah piku nistwaw !” : 
min dsay nohtsimihk ituhtéw. namuya kiskdyihtam utah wahpihisioah .. 


“ nisu\! dkwah piku niswaw,” ttwdw. 

dkwah nis uhpihdyiwah. ™ _ 

“yohuh, madnoh nika-sdkihikuhtaytk okth pihdwak ukuskuhiwdsisak |’? vo 

dsay mina stpwdhtéw. dsay mina pd-méskistam uma sipisis. 

“nistu | dkwah anuhts dkwah nik-uhpin. iskakaniyah-, usk-dyah 
astwatuhk astutin aydwinisah, ‘ awiyak dsiwakdmd-uhpitsih nika-miydw, ’ 
ttwahk. dkwah maka niwih-uhpin, ” itwéw: 

dkwah sinpwadhtdw; dkwah dkutd. sdkuwiw: “ dkwah niwih-uhpin ; 
niwth-utinén usk-dyah ; niya nik-dydn; niwih-uhpin | namuya akwah “ 
niwith-nakin |" itwéw ;° dtsimustawdw ohih ka-kdsohtakut. 

dkwah pé-wdéyatsdwiw, d-pd-sdkuwat. mituni kistwastw pisisik. timiw 
uma sipisis. um dh-uhpit dyitawakém pihdwah kd-uhpiyit, ch-pitihkuytt. 
sdkistw ; tawakdm pahkisin. ohi kdé-mandtsihtdt umaskisinah, uldsah kd- a 
iapiskahk, kahkiyaw sdpupataw, utakuhpah. “tsa ! matsastimwak ka- 
kuskuwthitsik, kd-sépupatawak ntaydwinisah |” itwdw. 

dkwah pdsam. 

“hah, nika-pthtwan ! kih-pthtwayanih, dkuyikuhk ta-pdstawah ohi 
nitaySwinisah, ” dtwaw. 

dkwah d-ntunawat wahpihtsisah, nama miskawéw. 

“ ténitdh uma, nahpihtsis dsi-wanithak ?” 

ntunawéw nipthk, dkwah dka d-miskawat. kitahtawa kd-wapamat . 
dh-akutsiniyit. ; 

“ tsdya ! ~mats-akpihisis awa ké-kdsohtawit ! nikaskdyihtéh a-wih- 
pihtwayan !” 

akuhtsiniyiwah ; ulindw; nama kékway. piyisk wmayikuhk ; nama 
kékway. Co 
“Gh, Gh-tapasit awa nahpihtsis !” itéyihiam; “nitsawats kinwis 


kimiw. ’ 
dkwah umis ah-totahk, ptyisk nahapiw. ndté muhtsihk kaskatawah- 
kinikaw ; nama kékway. - ° 


rae 
Je 


22 


‘dpiw; “dwakw dwa nahpihisis 1" ttwiw, “ mahtth dkwah nik- 
otindw, ”’ dh-itdyithtahk. 
kisiwdsiw dsay. 
Gkwah umis adh-totahk, otah dh-akuhisihk dtah, “ nk-dti-umisatisk- 
wayin,’' dy-ttéyihtahk, pot ohi ispimihk dtah mistikuhk kth-aleutsiniyiwah. 
“tsih | mats-ahpthtsis awa ké-wah-wanihak, ka-kaskdyihtamihit ! 
niwih-pihtie dwé ! dtstk dwah itah dy-akutsthk !” irwdw ; “ ntsawdts namuy 
dwiyak, ” itwéw, dh-utindt, “ ntsawdts kika-nahihun, aka kit-dpatistyan. ” 
wipindw. nama kdkwayah 6h utéspwakana wahpihisisah minah. 
wdpindw. ; 
hisupwayiw. nam dskwah pdstdyiwah utaydwinisah.  nitsawats sip- 
wahtaw. kilahtawd sdpupdyiwa utakuhpah ; kusikwatdyiwah. usim 
G-kisupwaytk, ah-pimuhtét, pétth usém Gh-pwawihat oh otakuhpah, a- 
kisdstdytk, patih kd-wapamat asiniyah d-misikitiyit. tuhtdw. 
dw-utihtal, ' ‘haw, nisim, ” wldw oh dsiniyah, “ kimiyitin awa nitakukp, ” 
ilaw. 
akwanahdw.  kéh-akwanahat, ati-sipwahiéw ; musdskatiw. dkwah 
namuya wadhyaw ch-ihtdt, | ka-pad-nokwani ytk é-wih-kimiwaniyik, Gh-pd-kah- 
kitoyit Piydsiwah. 
“yoro, nika-sapupan ! nitsawdis kawih nka-nataw kd-kth-makiyan, ” 
itdyihtam, “ nitakuhp.” 
Kiwépahtaw ; iakuhtéw ; ulindw. 
“ nnd-ndtdw awa nitakuhp, ” ttwaw. 
“yahah, maka mina nika-wiy-pimitisahuk awa kd-kih-miyak nital- 
uhpah !” itwéw, hit Ohth asiniyah, 
ay-dpasdpiw. dkust kitahtawd kd-waskawiyit oh dsiniyah, piyd- 
tihtipiyit. méoskistak, tapiskots éma dh-tihtiptpayiyit. 
“ yahah, umihkawikih awa {” tlw ; ‘ist tsikdhtaw /” r 
piyisk kisiwaék ; wdyatséwiw. ’ Kisupwiyiw ; kipah nayawapiw.: 
amatsiwdw ispatinahk. 
“mahtith &ék d-kih-pdy-dmatsiwit awa kd-watakamisit, _ Bilaiubpah 
G-kth-awihak !” 
dkwah tapwd mihkawikiyiwa. nitsawats tapastw. 
‘dldy G-sakayik itimow, _Semahtih kit-dlisin awa ka-watakamisit.. pr 
ch-~itwit. 
Gkwah sakaéw dw-utihtahk aw asini y, kah-kawiskawaéw ohi ‘mistikewah, : 
asay wisahkatsahk sékisiw ; dkwah wayatsdwiw. 
‘usdm ak dwiyak ta-Kih~itamuyan, kayas nohidwiy d-ki-nipit, ”’ itwéw ; 
“ tackih nea mutt nam awiyak,” itwdw. 
paskwahk wamow. mitunih nayawa 1W. oe 
“ntsawdts kiyam nka-nipahik,” dh-itéythtahk, kawipaythow. 
usitihk mahtakuskak ohth aBiniyah. 
“ dstam-itah nawats, nisim !” ttéw. 
pay-Ghtapiyiwah uskdtihk ; ékwah mahtakuskék. 
“ dstam-atah nawats, nisim |” 
“namuya !” aek ; “ kispin itahk dpiyanih, nama wihkats nitahtapin, ” 


itik, 
dkusi dkwah nama kih-pihkuhow, kahkiyaw kékway pamuhtayits aékutah, 
manitsosah, “ kakwé-pihkuhin, nism !” Gh-itat, “ namuya ! nikustaw 3 
Gy-itikut, 
‘ nistm, kiydém kitimakdyimin !” 


23 


“namuya ! nikustaw usam !” kth-itaw; “ péiyakwanuhk kit-apit, 

itah dpitsth,”’ itik nandtuhk. ohih kékwah. , 

_Kitahtawd piskwah kinwés kd-kituyit'; dh-kituyit, kd-tsipipayiyit. 
* yohon, pakahkam aw asiniy kustiw dwakunth,” itéythtam ; “ nisim, 
dstam 1” ; 
“ hah, nistisd, dyah, maka minah wé-totawiyan !” 
“nama wiya, nisim ! kakwd-pihkuhin ; nitiskiskak aw dsiniy. kik- 
dsi-miyusiyan kik-dsihitin, kispin pahkwatinatst awa asiniy.”’ 
» “haha, adkaya maka kiyaski ; nitaka nnohtd-miyusin, nistésd,” itik 

piskwah. , 

«. dkwah spéhkdpayihdw awa piskwah ; dkutéw uhtsi pdé-moskistawéw 
oh dsiniyah ; pwékitsitaw. padstsipayiw aw dsiniy. kéydpits nama kih- 
pihkuhow awa wisahkdtsahk. ° 

“nisim, ahkamdyimuh | kakwé-pihkuhin ! kit-dsih-miyusiyin  kik- 
-dsthitin ; ka-wawdsthitin. ” ° 7 

“ dha’ , nistdsd, mitunth nindhid-miyusin ; usdm niwiyipisin, ” ttik. 

dsay minah ispahkdpayihuyiwa ; Gsay minah pd-moskistawdw asiniyah ; 
mitunt kisiwak pwdkitsitaw Ohi asiniyah. mitunth pikupayiyiwa ; nandnis 
apiyiwa. pihkuhdw awa wisahkdtsahk. ; 

dkwah, “ dstam, nisim ; mistahi kitatamthin !” 

Gkwah wdapatuniskah, asiskiy Gh-wadpiskayik utinam wisahkdtsahk ;» 
dkwah awch piskwah wa-wapamisow, pah-pahkih éh-wapiskisit. 

_ dkwah umis itéyihtam : “ldpwé nimiyusin |” tidyihtam. 

“ dstam, nisim. mahtih kihkwakanihk min dkutah kik-ésihitin ; usém 
kinwaw kiskiwan. dstam-! tyikuhk kit-ispihtsdw.” 

“ dha’, atik. 

dkwah umisi totawdw ; asdnaskatinamwéw. dkwah sisikuts utthtindw, 

dm dtoniyiw umis dy-ispitamwat. dkwah pakwatam awa piskwah d-misdytk 
utun. 

dkuytkuhk kahkiyaw. 


Onte upon a time Wisahketchahk set out. Presently he saw some 
young partridges in a nest. 

“My little brothers, partridges, what is your name?” . 

“But you just did name‘us, when you said, ‘partridges’; that is the 
only name we have.” , 

“ “No!” said Wisahketchahk; ‘Everything has two names.” * 
“ «No,” they told him; “For we have only this name, ‘partridges’.” 

“No, little brother! Take thought upon it; you have some other 
name besides.” ; 

Thereupon the oldest of them said to him, “To be sure, my mother. 
and father do say to us, ‘Little Startlers,’ we are called; and ‘Partridges’; 
we have two names.” . 

“Bosh! Tine ones these are to startle anyone!” he said to them,.... 
nn er to show his contempt; ‘You couldn’t 


told them. . 


: 24 


With that he left them. ‘hen, when those partridges came home, 
what had happened to their children! esc. ccceseeeecceeseeveceeea, 

“Why is this, children, that you look like this.............-.0, aa 
their mother and their father asked them. 

“Why, wheh that person Wisahketchahk asked us, ‘What is your 
name, little brotMers, partridges?’ and we did not tell him, but said to him, 
‘But you have just spoken our name,’ then he said to us, ‘No; everything 
has two names.’ At last I told him, saying to him, ‘Little Startlers we are 
called,’ whereupon he said of us, ‘Fine ones these are to startle anyone,’ 
ect ae tenet ta ee ete eens With that he was off and away, laughing.” 

“Well, wife, come away. When he comes to the creek again, we shall 
make him a laughing-stock for saying to our children, ‘Fine ohes. these, to 
startle anyone.’ Let us attack him.” 

Accordingly they appealed to the other partridges, and all\assembled. 
Then presently he came to the creek in the woods. And there on both 
sides, on both banks sat the partridges in concealment. 

Then Wisahketchahk reached the creek. The water was b right and 
clear. When he came to it there, he had on a buffalo-robe; and leather 
was his coat; of leather were his breeches. 

Then he spoke as follows: ‘“Come’—and loudly he spoke—‘ ihave a 
feeling that a new hat has been put up as a prize, and new clothes, and it 
has been announced, ‘If anyone jumps to the far shore, he shall have these.’ 
Three times I shall’ stop short; then, the fourth time, I shall ju np,” hes 
said. 

The partridges listened to him; but he did not see them. Then he 
walked. back up the bank. 

“For a short while I shall exercise my legs, ” he said; he simply told 
them what.he meant.to do. 

Then he stood a ways off; he put. his blanket-robe here, like this; 
he put it round his neck. Then he came on a running start; at the bank. 
’ of the creek he stopped with a jump. 

“Tut tut, I shall get my tobacco-pouch all wet; if I don’t male it, ” 
he said; “Tl ‘throw it across.” 

He took his tobacco-pouch; he did not keep his eye on it as he flung 
it; like this it fell somewhere on the other bank. When he threw it, one 
of the partridges flew up. _ 

“Tut tut, really, he came very near startling me!’’ he said. 

“Now only three times more!” 

Again he went away from the water. He did not know the exact spot 
to which he had tossed his tobacco-pouch. Then he came with a running 
start; he stopped. 

“Two! Now only twice more!” he said. 

Then two of them flew up. 

“Tut tut, they came mighty near searing me, these partridges, these 
little startlers!” 

Again he went off. Again he-came running at that creek. | 

“Three! Now this time I’shall jump. Without doubt a new hat has 
been put up as @ prize, and new, clothes, with the statement, ‘If anyone 
jumps across the water, I shall give him ‘these.’ But now I shall jump,” 

e sai : 


. 25 a 

Then he was off: ‘and then he shouted: “Now I'am going to jump; 
I am going to take’ the new clothes; I, I shall have them; I am going to 
jump! This time-Ishan’t stop!” he cried; hé gave it all away to them who 
were hiding’ from him. 

Then he came with a running start; he came a-shouting. - He kept 
himself in a high state. of excitement. "When he jumped, up went the 
partridges from-both banks with a whirr. He was scared; he fell into the 
middle of the water. Those moccasins of his, which he treated with such 
care, his b , which he had round his neck, he got them all drenched, 
and his blanket-robe. “Bah! Those dirty dogs startled me and made 
me get my clothes all wet!” he cried. 

Then he dried them. 

“Ha, I shall have a smoke! When 1 have smoked, these clothes of 
mine will be dry,” he said. 

Then, when he looked for his tobacco-pouch, he could not find it. 

“Where can it be that I lost my tobacco-pouch?” 

He looked for it in the water, but he did not find it. Then all at once 
he saw it lying in the water. 

“Bah! This nasty tobacco-pouch has been hiding from me! I was 
getting sad for want of a smoke!” 

It lay there in the water; he reached to take it; there Kas nothing. 
At last as far as this; nothing. 

: “Oho, and so this tobacco-pouch of mine is running away!’ he thought; 
“Tt has been away a long time, for all I could do.” 

Then, when he reached like this, at last he was in a sitting position. 
Way out he was scratching up gravel from the bed of the stream; nothing. 

He looked there; ‘There is my tobacco-pouch!” he cried; ‘“Now do 
let me take it,’”’ he thought. 

He was angry by this time. 

Then,-when he did like this, there where, by this time, he lay in the 
water, thinking, “T will turn my ‘head like this when I reach,” why, there, 
up aloft in a tree there, hung that thing. 

“Pah! There is that nasty tobacco-pouch I kept ib ihe till it made 
me miserable! As if I hadn’t been longing for a smokey tA nd so there it 
hangs!” he cried; ‘Since you won’t have it otherwise, bev Usent,” he said, 


"taking it; “Sinee you won’t have it otherwise, I’ll teach you how ta, be of 


no use.’ 

He gave it a fling.‘ Gone was his tobacco-pouch, and his pipe as 
He threw them away. 

It was hot weather. His garments-were not yet dry. So he needs went 
off without. Now his blanket was drenched through; it was heavy. And 
as the weather was very hot, ag he walked along, he could hardly carry 
that blanket-robe of his, in the ‘hot sun, when there he saw a big stone. 
He walked over there. Sx, 

When he came up to it, uN Now, brother,” -he said to that stone, “I give 
you this blanket of mine,’ “he sdid to it. ‘ 

He put the robe on ‘the stone. When he had covered it, he went away; 
he went naked. Then, when he had not gone far, there came signs of rain, 
as the Thunderers sounded their approach.~ 

“Tut tut, I shall be drenched! I shail have to. get back the thing I 
gave away,” he thought, ‘my blanket. ” 


well. 


26 a 


He ran back; he came to the place; he took it. 

“T have come to get my blanket here,” he said. ; 

“Dear me, but now this fellow to whom I had given my blanket will 
come and chase me!’ he said, speaking of that stone. 

He kept looking behind him. And soon, there, that stone began to 
move and roll toward him. It went for him, rolling along, like this. 

, ‘Dear me, he runs fast, this fellow!”’ he said of it; ‘It’s a close shave, 
this!” 

At last it was near; he ran hard. It was hot weather; soon he was 
tired. He ran up a hill. 

“Let’s hope that he won’t be able to come up the hill, this dangerous 
person to whom I lent my blanket!” 

Truly, it went fast. There was nothing to do but flee. 

He fled to a wooded place, ‘“Let’s hope that dangerous character will 
be blocked!” he said. 

But when that stone reached the wooded place, it knocked over one 
tree after another. By this time Wisahketchahk was thoroughly frightened; 
he ran with all his might. ’ . 

‘And there is no one I can flee to, for my father died long ago,’’ he 
said; “There isn’t anyone could help me,” he said. 

. He fled into the open country. He was very tired. 

“There is no escape; he will kill me, that’s all,” he thought, and flung 
himself down. : 

The stone came down on his foot and held him fast. 

“Farther up this way, brother!’ he said to it. 

It moved farther up, onto his leg; it held him fast with its weight. 

“Farther up this way, brother!” 

“No!” it answered him; “If I sit down anywhere, -I never change 
my seat,” it answered him. 

. So now he could not get himself free, and whenever any creature, even 
a worm or a beetle, went by, “Try and get me free, little brother!” he 
would say to it, but “No! I am afraid of him!” it would answer him. 

“Little brother, please take pity on me!’”’ 

“No! I fear him too much!” he was told; ‘Let him stay where he is, 
when he takes his seat anywhere,’’ those different creatures said to him. 


Then at one time the mosquito-hawk gave a long, repeated cry; when - 


. it cried, the stone moved with a jerk. 

“Hoho, plainly this stone fears this one creature,” he thought; “Little 
brother, come here!” 

»- .“Flah, big brother, I wonder what you will be doing to me this time!” 

“No, truly, little brother! Try to get me free; this stone is killing me 
with its weight. I will make you beautiful, if you move this stone away.” 

“Very well; but do not lie; I surely much want to be beautiful, big 
brother,”’ the mosquito-hawk answered him. 

Then the mosquito-hawk soared up into the air; from there it came 
attacking that stone; .......... eee eeees The stone split. Even yet 
Wisahketchahk could not get himself free. 

“Little brother, keep at it! Do try to get me free! I will make you 
handsome; I will deck you out.” 

“Very well, big brother; I am very eager to be beautiful; I am too 
drab of colour,’ it answered him. ‘ 


ae 


— 


27 


Again it rose.soaring into the air; again it came and attacked the 
BLONES occ cece eee cece rece cee eee teens Seve eer eceeces The stone burst 
into many pieces; it Jay here and there. Wisahketchahk was free. 

Then, ‘Come here, little brother; you have greatly obliged me!” 

Then Wisahketchahk took up some white clay, white earth; then 
that mosquito-hawk lookéd at itself, and saw that it was streaked with 
white. 
Then thus it thought: “Surely I am beautiful!” it thought. 

“Come here, little brother. Let me arrange your face as well; too 
long is -your-beak.—.Come here! It ought to be only as long as this?” - - ~ 

“Very well,” it answered him. ° , 

Then he did like this to it; he bent the thing crooked for it. And then’ 
suddenly he grabbed“it and stretched out its mouth for it, like this.. The 
mosquito-hawk hated having a big mouth. 

~ That is all. 


(3) Wisahketchahk Visits the Partridges 


. Mrs, Adam Sakewew 
kiyakdéskamikapiw+ ; ; 
kiséyiniw sipwahtéw, dkwah ah-pipuniyik. dh-utakusiniyik, Kitahtawéd 
péhtawdw awasisah. mihtsdtukamikisiyiwa, mihtsét mikiwahpah. 
Gh-ati-takuhtat ispatinahk, awasisah, “ ukiyutéw 1” itek. 
| “Gh, dtah@la-pdy-ttuhtéw ; otah ta~pdmitssow !” 
“ha, ituhtdw dkuté, pihidyis ah-tsimatdyik. 4a, pihtukaw. 
“ G, asam nistis ; ta-mitsisow.” ; 
asamaw. ; 
“ nahkwdsikandpuy, ” ttéyihtam. 
“ 6tah ta-pé-mitsisow,”’ ttéw, dh-mitumiht.. 
nam dskwa mitsisow, ‘ 
dkwah mwahtsi d-wih-mitsisut, dsay mina kutakihk kutakah Gh-ntumikut. 
dkwah ah-pilitukat, d-wih-mitsisut, Omisi dkwah : “ nistés ta~pd-kiwaw. ” 
kiwdw. . 
Gh-pthtukét, “haw, nstésd, kawisimuh ! kipoh mana pitsinéniwiw, 
kiksépd d-wih-pitsihk. kawisimuh !” : ; 
kéh-kdtstw. 
“ q, nstésd, kipah mana pitsiwak oki ayisiyiniwak kiksépa ! ” 
“nisindw nitim kutawétsih, dkutah nika-pdkupayin,” ttéythtam. 
kétaydwinisdw, “ watinahk nika-nipan, " Gh-itdyihtahk. -_ a 
dkwah kaksdpa pisindw éh-wasénakwaniytk, uhpiyiwah..Ghi piydsisa, 
“ ayisiyiniwak ” k-dtéyihtahk. sakakundkapawi. ee 
“ tsa, winikundwi-mahkayak !” 
dékwah pustaydwinisdw. 
“ nama kihtwam nka-waydsihikuk 1” 
Ghuah, sipwahidun. 


“ mithigh utéh ka-wikihk 1” 


te 


1 The narratress has since died. , - con . . 

One way—and no doubt an anciept one—ol telling Culture Hero stories (which are known to 
every listener) is in a series of lacorilv-aentences, largely quotations of speeches. . 
In thia anecdote Wisahketchahk visits the partridges.ji their camp., In each tent food is act 
before him, but before he can eat, he is dragged off by fomho-other host, In the morning the 
partridges fly off before he wakes up, leaving him alone inthe snow. 


r 


ry 


28 


dkutd ttuhtaw. mikunta stpwdhidw. mitusiskdhk, itah d-sipdyydtk, 
awdsisah dh-tatwdédwitamiyit,’ d-séskwatstwdyit, mistaht ‘tahtakusiw kénah, 
awasisah itah Gh-matawatsik, ch-kiskwatstk. 
dsay minah nitumdw. asay tipiskayiw. pimihkan asaméw. 
mwéhist dh-utinahk, “ hdw, nipd-ntumaw kstdsinaw ; ta-pa-milsiséw 
nikthk, ” ttaw. 
« haw, nilim, pa-Mwéyani, nika-mitsin 6ma,” itéw Shi iskwdwah. 
dsay minah ntumdw: “ pitah niya nistés nikihk kita-pd-mitsisow ; 
usém kayds ké-wadpamak kistésinaw.’ 
. “ haw, nitim, ttah ka-wikihkamuyan, Gkutah ituhtatan 6émah k-dsamiyin 
pimihkan, itwatw. 
dsay minah kiwdw. ; 
“d, nsim, mistahi nindstuhtan ; ch-timikunik usdtindhk niwi-nipdan. ” 
“nstdsd, wipats wth-pitsiw awa ukimadw [" 
asay miskadkantyiw itéh d-wih-ayuwdpihk. 
‘, pitah dkutah d-wih-mitsisuhk, maywds mitsisuh d-wih-pitsihk, ” 
‘d, nisim, kutawdtet nitim, dsay nka-waniskdn, ” tldw usima. 
itis kétsckunam umaskisina uldsa minah uskutakay, d-aspiskwésimut, 
nipaw. mituni kiksdépdw, wahyaw dh-pd-wadpaniyik, mdkwats ah-nipat 
awa wisahkdtsdhk, kétahtawd sisikuts k-dhpahuyit pihdwah. dkutouihk 
ka-pthtukat, itamihk konihk ah-stpdyakunakthiht. 
“Usd | wintkundyu-mahkayak ka-waydsihitsk ! niya kahkiyaw awiyak 
ké-waydsimak, kihkthk ka-waydsimitindwaw !”. itéw. , . 
Gkust dkuyikuhk, 


The Old Man set out, and it was in winter. Presetitly, towards , 


evening, he heard some children. Those people had many tents, many 

were the lodges. 

When he arrived at the hill, the children said of him, “‘A visitor!” 

‘ “Ho, let him come here; let him come here and eat!” : 

So he went to the tent that stood in the centre. He entered.’ 

“Hey, give my big brother something to eat; let him have a meal.” . 

He was given food. ; 

“Porridge,” he thought. — a ; 

“Let him come and eat over here,” someone , said to him, inviting him. 

He had not yet begun to eat. -- 

Then, just as he was:about to begin eating, agairi he was invited by 
others to another tent.’--- 

. Then, as he went in and was ; about to eat, then, “Let my big ‘brother 
come back here.” Stas) 


As he entered, “Well now, brother, go to bed! We always move ‘camp 
early, when we move in the morning. Go to bed!” 

He undressed. 

“Ho, big brother, these folks always break camp véry. Piediay. of 8 
morning!” 

“As soon ag my sister-in-law kindles the fire, I shall wake up,” thought 
‘he. He took off his clothes, thinking “I do want to sleep i in comfdrt.” 


” 4 This sentence and the following speech are unintelligible tome. 


oa, 


He went back. : - ve US 


o 


-_ 29 a 


a 


Then in the morning, promptly with the’ first gleam of das, up flew 
those birds which he had taken for people. He stood thete, deep in s 
snow-drift. a 

“Bah, the filthy brutea!” a 

Then he put on his clothes. , ‘ a 

“They shan’t fool me again!” bs a 

Then he went away. a“ 

“I'd better go to some inhabited placel?? ©.) 

He went over yonder. He sect. out at random. Hé went to a poplar- 
grove, to where there was an open place among the trees, where some 
children were playing noisily, sliding down a Hill Very hard and smooth 
was the snow where the children were playing and raising a rumpus. 

This time, too, he was invited: It was already. dark. He was given 
some pémmican. ‘ Do 

Just as he took it, “Hullo, I’ve come to invite our big brother; he is 
to come eat at our hotse,” he was told. _ 

“Well, sister-in-law, when I come back here, I shall eat this,” he told 
the woman there. hh 

Again he was invited: “First let my big brother ‘come est ‘at my 
house; it is really too Jong since:I have seen our big brother.” - 

_ ‘Well, sister-in-law, let us. take the pemmican over to where I am 
a visiting for the night,’’ he said. ; 

Again he went back. | 

“Now, little brother, I am tired from my long tramp; I want to’. 
sleep on the deep snow, on the hillside.” ; * 

“Big brother, ‘the chief here means to move camp promptly!” 

They had already found the place to stop to rest. 

“Wait and eat at the place where,we are planning to eat, before we 

. move on.” . ; . 

“Oh, little brother, when my sister-in-law kindles the fire, I shall get 
up all right,” he told his younger brother. 

Accordingly he took off his moccasins, his breeches, and his jacket; 
using them all for a pillow. He slept. Very early, at the first far-off sign 
of dawn, while that Wisahketchahk was yet asleep, suddenly up flew the | 

' partridges. For such they were whose tents he had entered, and he had ~ 
been led to go deep under the snow. 

“Bah, the filthy brutes have tricked me! I, who trick everyone, I 
shall trick you none the less!” he said of them. 

That is all. “ 


(4) Wisahketchahk Preaches to the Wolves 


Coming-Day 
kd-kisikaw-pihtukéw. » . 
wisahkdtsahk mistahi kitimakisiw; nama wya kékway ulaydwinis d- 

wikitsik, dh-aydtsik: kitahtawd iakusinwak wdmistikosiwak, dh-papa- 
atéwatsik ahtayah, mahihkanah dkwah mustuswaydnah. dkwah wisahkdisahk 
nama kékway ayéw atawakan. kutakak ayisiyiniwak mistahih ayawak; 
aidwiwak dkunik mistahi aydwinisah ; dkwah wisahkdtsahk nama kikway. 

83186—8 . 

uo 


; 30 


dkwah émis itdw wamistikdsiwah: “nama tsi nika-ki-masinahtkan ? - 
nama kdkway atéwakan nitaydn. médka kiyipah mihtsit nik-adyan ka- 
tipahikdydn, ’ dkus émisitwaw ; wamistikésiwah itéw wisahkdtsadhk awah : 
“nama kékway ka-kth-lipahtkakan. kispin miyiyinth, kiyipah nik-adydan.” 
“ ahd’ | '—wdmistikéstwak—" kékway kintawdythtén, wisahkdtsahk ?” 

“wapuwiydnah nisu, minah mitds nisu, miskutdkay mina nisu, pdsk- 
tstkan. ” 

dkutah mistaht ayéwinis utinam. dkust dkwah kiwdw wisahkdtsdhk.- 
uutkimdkanah miydw kahkiyaw. a 

wmnisiy itik uwikimakanah: ‘ muhtsu-kisdyiniw, tantah ki-étinaman 
tah-tipahikdkdyin ? ” , a 

dkusi itwaw, “ nétukdsiw, péyakwaw nna-niawadpamaw! wamistikosiw .” 

dkust dkwah stpwahtaw. : , 

dh-pihtukdt, wamistikésiw awah umis ttéw: “ ah, wisahkdtsahk, kipd- 
tipahikan ?” ue 

“ namuya,” itwéw wisahkdtsahk ; “ miyin pisisipowin. ” 

“ tdnist kitétan ? ” : . : 

“ah, mahihkanak nika-nipahéwak, " 

dGkwah miyik maskihkiy, pistsip6win. dkwah kiwdw wisahkdtsahk. 

éh-pihtukét wikiwahk, “ notukdsiw, miyin pimiy.” . ; . 

miyik pimiy. dkwah dkutah pistsipdwin astaw pimihk ; dkwa apisdsin 
uyadkanis, sikinam dkutah pimiy. mihtsdt dkutah usihtaw apisdsikih pimisah 
Ghkwatinah? dkwah kahkiyaw utinam; dkwah sipwéhtdw d-ntunawat 
mahithkanah. ; 

Kiahtawé wapamdw mahihkanah pdyak. 

“Gh, nisim, dstam !?’—éhi mahihkanah. * 

“ad, namoya !” itwiw mahihkan, “ a, kiwih-nipahin usém 1” 

“ namoya, nisim. d-wih-masinahikdhitan. ” ; 

“tdnisi d-wih-isi-masinahikahiyin ? ” . 

“ G-wih-aluskahitén ka-papd-ntumatsik mahihkanak mina mahkdsisak, 
kahkiyaw ka-miyusitsik mahkdsisak. 6tah nik-adpin ispatinahk, d-wih- 
kakdskimitakuk, é-miywasthk dtsiméwin ka-wihtamatakuk. ”’ 

dkwah tépwdé awa mahihkan sipwéhidw, d-nitumat mahihkanah mina 
mahkdsisah, tapwd pétuhtdwak mihtsét mahihkanak. mituni misiwd 
wasakam apiyiwah, d-wih-niuhtakut, (apiskdts ayimihdwiyiniw wisahkdt- 
sahk. 

Omisth itdw: “nisimitik, ayamihdwin kd-ntuhtamaék t-dtinamék ; 
Gkusi dkwah namuy dwiyak ka-nipahikuwawak, ayamthdyékuh. maka 
Gkah tépwihtamakuh, ‘ka-nipahikuwdwak. th-shi wapahtamuk, ah-ohi !” 
mahthkanak mahkésisak d-wadpahtahkik shi pimiyah, “haw, umah awiyak- 
umah mitsitsi kd-wih-saskamuhak, kinwdés ka-pimdtisiw,” dkusi itwéw 
wisahkdtsahk. 

Gkwah kahkiyaw, “ niya; niya !” itwéwak mahihkanak, ah-miyway- 
thtahkik kinwés ka-pimdtisitsik. 

“ dkwah umah,” ékwah miydw pimiy. 


! 


} The combination ni does not exist in the full form of Cree words, but is due to the 
loss of an intermediate short vowel; See Introduction. Occasional forms like rarntarodpa- 
méw: “he goes to see him,” are allegro varianta for such as na-nitawdpamdw; the 
syllable here is reduplicative. This differs from Ojibwa, where nand- is probably the normal 
representation of older nat-, ; ms 

? Probably an error. 


3l 


~ mitsiw awa mahthkan ; dkusi dkwah sipwahtaw, 

pah-pdyak dh-saskamuhdt wdsakém, mina mahkédsisah, _kahkiyaw 
mastinam omah pimiy. 
haibé “ dkust kinwas ka-pimdatisindwaw, nisimitik, uma k-6tinamadk ayami- 

ain. 

tdpiskits ayamthdwiyiniw wisahkdtsdhk, dh-miydt mahihkanah ayami- 
hawin, kitahtawah dh-apit mdkwats wisahkdtsahk, kahkiyaw kwaskwdpayt- 
"huytwa mahihkanah, dh-pahkisiniyit, ch-pistsipuytt, kahkiyaw Gh-nipiyit. 

“ matsi-kakdpatisak oki! nik-6h-ta-tipahtkakdwa !” ttdw as Ohi 
mahihkanah wisahkdétsahk. 

dkwah wiyinihéw, dh-kiwdhtahat, dkwah mahkdsisah minah kahkiyaw. 
mahihkanah ayamthawin ka-kiskindhamawdl, kahkiyaw nipahdw. dkust 
kahkiyaw tipaham umasinahikéwinah, ah-way yasimat mahthkanah. 

dkusi ékuyikuhk. 


Wisahketchahk was very poor; he had not even clothing in his-house, 
where he dwelt with his family. Then at one time arrived some Frenchmen - 
who were going about buying furs, wolf-pelts and buffalo-robes. But .. 
Wisahketchahk had no furs to sell. The other people had many; they 
bought many clothes, but Wisahketchahk none at all. 

Then he spoke to the Frenchmen as follows: ‘“Won’t you let me have 
credit? J haven’t any furs. But in a short time I shall have a good many 
with which to pay my debt.” Thus Wisahketchahk spoke to the(French- 
man: ou will not need to pay anything. If you give me crejlit, ina 
short time I shall have them.” © , 

“Very well,”—the F Frenchmen—What do you want, Wisahketchahk?” 

“Two blankets, two pairs of breeches, and two coats, and a gun.” 

‘Then he took a great deal of clothing. Then Wisahketchahk went 
home. He gave all of it to his wife. 

This is what his wife said to him: ‘Crazy old man, where can you get 
anything with which to pay?” 

He answered, “Old woman, once more I shall go see the Frenchmen.” 

So he set out. ° 

When he entered, thé Frenchmen said, “Well; Wisahketchahk, have 
you come to pay?” 

“No,” said. Wisahketchahk; “Give me some poison.” 

“What do you want that for?” 

“Oh, I am going to kill wolves.” wv ; 

So the other gave him some medicing, ‘poison. Then Wisahketchahk 
went home. ; 

When he came into the tent: “Old woman, give me some fat.” 

She gave him fat. Then he put the poison into the fat; and into a- 
- small dish he poured the fat. He shaped a great many little ‘jumps of fat 
and cooled them until they were hard. He took them all, and went out ta 
look for wolves. 

Presently he saw a wolf. 

“Hey, brother, come here!’””—to that wolf. 

“Oh dear, no!” said the wolf; ‘“‘Why, you want to kill me!” 

“No, little brother. I want to employ you.’”- 

“How do you want to employ me?” 


83180—25 


ee . 


_ ka-kisikaw-pthtukéw. 


. “T want to give you the work. of going round and summoning the 
wolves and foxes, all the good-looking foxes. - I shall be sitting here on this 
knoll, ready to preach to you, to tell you good tidings,” - 

‘So that wolf went off to call the wolves and foxes;~_Indeed, many 
wolves came. In great numbers they sat round in a circle, to~listen to 
Wisahketchahk, exactly as if he were a missionary. 

This is what he ‘said: “My brothers, the tidings which you hear you 
should accept, and then no one will ever kill you, if you take on religion. 
But if you do not believe, someone will kill you. Look upon these things, 


- these here!” As the wolves and foxes looked at those pieces of fat, ‘“Now, 


then, if anyone eats this which I shall place between his teeth, long will 
he live,” spoke Wisahketchahk. 

Then all the wolves cried, “I, I!’ glad that they were to live long. 

' “Here you are!” and he gave them the fat. = - _ 

A wolf would eat it; then he would go. . ; 

He placed it in their mouths one by one, round the circle, the foxes’ 
too, using up all the fat. * : 
' nee now long shall you live, brothers, now.you have accepted this 
aith.” ; . . 

Just like ‘a priest was Wisahketchahk, as he gave religious instruction 


. to the wolves. Presently, as Wisahketchahk sat there, all the wolves 


leaped up in the air and fell down, poisoned, and they all died. 
. “These stupid fools! I surely did need something to pay my debts 
with!” Wisahketchahk must have said to those wolves. 

Then he skinned them and took their skins home, and all the foxes’ 
too. Having taught the wolves religion, he killed them all. In this way 
he paid all his debts, by deceiving the wolves with talk. . 

at is all. : 


14 
‘ 


_ (5) Wisahketchahk Stabs a Buffalo and Both His Arms 
- . Coming-Day _ 


kétahtawé pimuhtéw wisahkdtsahk ; maka minah nohtéhkatéw. kitah- 
lawd wapamdéw mustuswah nisu; takwahnawah péiyak, pdyak iyapdsisah. 
” Omisi itdyihtam : “ tanisth nika-nipahadwak ? ” itéyihtam. 
nama kiékway paskisikan aydw. Gkwah sipwihtéw. dh-wdpamikut, 


__ wih-tapasiyiwah. 


~ “ tsdskwah, nisimitik | miywasin atsimuwin. k-dtsimustdtinawaw. ” 
wo isiskwah nipawiwak mustuswak ; namuwyd tapasiwak. dkwah takuh- 
law wisahkdétsahk. . ; ot 
bmigy itdw: “ ayisiyiniwak dh-itwdtsik, ‘takwahnaw wihkimdkusiw ; 
miyusiw,’ Gh-itwatsik, kutakak ayisiyiniwak omisih itwdwak': ‘iyadpdsis 
miyusiw ; wihkimdkusiw,’ Gh-itwatsik, ah-kih-kthkihtutsik. ak ohtsi 


. wih-kisiwasiwak. ‘mahti tséskwah niyah nika-wapamawak ; awinah wihki- 


mdikuusi,’ nititwin, kd-pd-nitawdpamitakuk,” d-wih-waydsimat shih mus- 
tuswah. | 2 . 
_ltapwah tapwahtam awa mustus. dkwah tahkindéw ; umis igi miydhtam 
ulsthisiy ; kutakah minah oh oté. umohkuman utinam. 
; jumasih itéw: “ kiya kiwthkimakusin ; kiyah kimiyusin,” itéw tydpd- 
sisoh, f. . 


oo 


~ Se 


33 


miywiyihtam iyapdsis adh-miyusit, ch-itéyihtahk. umohkuman tahka- 
maw wataythk. .tapasiyiwa. a - : 
“ malsih-kakdpdtis | tainitah kd-wihkimdkusit | ninohtéhkatéwah 1!” 
nipahiw ; nipiw awah iyapésis. dkusi éh-pahkisiniyit, dh-nipiytt, 
ituhtéw wisahkdtechk. eee 
“ hay hay hay | dkwah nika-mitsisun, ” itwdéw.. 
dkwah wiyinihdw, dh~pahkwikiswat. ~ 
dkwah umis itwdw wisahkdtsdhk : “ wiyin nikah-aydn,” ttwiw. 
uma éspitun, wisahkdtsahk uspitun “ naméya 1" ttwiw, ‘ niya nikah- 
~~. ayan wiyin,” itwdw. ae 
“~~ Kutak uspitun: “ namhoya ! niyah nik-Gydn.” . . 
dkusi pikiskwiwak, tapiskote nistu apfisiyiniwak, dh-pdyakut wisahkdt- 
sdhk. kistwdsiw dsay awa; awa’mina kisiwdsiw. ‘ 
“ namuya kik-dydn wiyin ; niyah niwth-aydn,” 
wisahkatsahk omisi pikiskwdw : “ aka wiyah, nisimitik | kuntah kiwt- 
kisiwaésindwaw wiyds uhtsi:” ~ 
a, namuwya | uhtsitaw dh-dspunisit.” 
“ a, dkdya nantaw itwd | kika-tahkamitin.” 
Gh, nista ka-tahkamitn. ” , ; 
 G, tdskwa nisim | namuya ta-miywisin ta-nipahituydk wiyds whtsi.” 
kunta maka kistwisiw. 
“Ghd nantaw twd 1)? 
mohkumdn bmisi tahkamdéw ; ma uspitun tahkahtam. kwéski miyisow 
umisi mohkuman. kutak minah uspitun tahkahtam. dkusi ékwah pahkihtin 
mobhkumdn ; nipahiw uspilunah. nipahilowak. 
dkwah wisahkatschk nipawiw, uspitunah bmisi. dkwah wisahkdtedhk 
naméya mitsiséw ; sipwihtdw ; nakatam wiyds. ayis uapitunah dhkustw ; 
‘ nipiyiwah uspitunah ; namuya kth-mitsiminam mohkumdn. oo 
 Gkusi dyakiw atiyihkéwin. ‘ 


oO 


Once upon a time Wisahketchahk was walking along; as usual, he 
; was hungry. Presently he saw two buffalos, a bull and a young steer. 
a This was what he thought: ‘‘How shall I kill them?” he thought. 
ee He had no gun. Then he went from there. When they saw him, 
_ they wanted to mn away. ; 
“Wait a bit, my little brothers. I shall tell you a good story!” 
Soon the buffalos stood still; they did not run away. Then Wisahket- 
chahk walked up to them. . oo 
This is what he said to them: “Some men said, ‘The bull smells good; 
he is beautiful,’ but then some others said, ‘The young steer is beautiful; 
he smells good,’ and so they quarrelled. On this account they were getting - 
quite angry. ‘Just wait a bit, while I go look at them to find out which 
sinells better,’ said I, and sa, I have come to see you,” he spoke to deceive 
those buffalos. ar a 
The buffalos really believed him. 8o he touched one; he smelled hi 
hand like this; and then the other one. He took his knife. a 
-He said to him, “You, you smell good; you, you are handsome,” he 
said to the young steer. oS ~ 
_ he steer was glad to think himeclf beautiful. stabbed him in 
the belly with his knife. The other one ran away. ; 


34 


‘Stupid fool! How should he smell good? It is hungry I was!’’ 

fle killed it; the young steer died. So when it fell down dead, Wisah- 
ketchahk walked up to it. . 
“Splendid! Now I shall eat,” he said. .. 
Then he cut it up, stripping off the-hide with his knife. 
Then thus spoke. Wisahketchahk: ‘“I shall. have the fat meat,” he 
said. ; Es 
_ _-His arm, Wisahketchahk’s one arm, said, “No! It is I shall have the 
fat meat,” it said. : 

His othtr arm said, “No! It is I shall have it.” a 

- §o they’ spoke, as if they were three persons, though there was only 
Wisahketchahk. The one had already grown angry; now the other, too, 
got into a rage. 

“You shan’t have the fat meat! I, I shall have'it!” 
Wisahketchahk spoke thus: “Don’t, little brothers! Needlessly you 
are growing angry over this meat.” : | 
“Oh, no! He simply insists on being selfish.” 
“Oh, keep still! V’ll stab you.” — / 
“Oho, it’s I who will stab you.” / \ 
“Now, wait, little brother! It wouldn’t do for you two to kill each 
other for the sake of this meat.” , a 
* But he got into a foolish rage. 
1. “Ho, Keep still!’ 
‘: With his knife he stabbed him like this; he stabbed that arm of his. 
% Across to the other side he handed himself the knife, like this. He stabbed 
his other arm, too. And so then the knife fell down; he had killed hig 
arms. They had killed each other. 

_' There stood Wisahketchahk, with his arms like this. And Wisah- 
ketchahk did not eat; he went away; he left the meat. For he was sick 
in his arms; in fact, his arms had died; he was not able to hold-a knife. 

Thus goes this sacred, story. 


4 


(6) The Shut-Eye Dancers 
Coming-Day 

ké-kisthdw-pihtukdw. 

kitahtawa Gh-pimuhtét wisahkdteahk,—nuhtéhkatéw maka mina,~dh- - 
pimuhlit, kd-wdpamdl sisipah, dkwah niskah mihtsdt, sistpah. ws 

dkust Omist itdyihtam : “ ténisi k-dsi-nipahakik ? ” ttéyihtam, . 

kitahtawd kd-wapahtahk sdkahikanis, ékutah sisund nipthk ka-wapah- 
tahk asisiyah. utinam, ah-titipinahk. mistahih tahkupitam, éh-nayahtahk, 
Gr atpudhtat. sistpah itah k-Gyayit, dkutah tstkih dh-pimuhtét, kd-wdpamikut 
sisipoh, \ — ; — . 

6mis twiwak sisipak: “ha, kistésinaw 1”. itwawak ; .“‘ kdkway ka- 
nayahtahk ? ”| dkust itwéwak. 

“ mahtih| nika-kakwitsimaw,” itwéw awa sist. 

“ dha’ ,’! itwéwak. . 

“ mT Kikway kad-nayahtaman? ” 


“Aree 


~~ 


35 \ 


.  Gahtst pikuh pimuhtéw ; tapiskéts dkah éh-péhtawdt, Ghtst pikuh pimuh- 
dsay minah sistp umis ildw : “ nistésé, kikway kd-nayahtaman ? ” 
ékhuyikuhk nipawiw wisahkdtsahk. 
“mah,” itwaw, “ kikway kd~nayahtaman 7?” 
“ wah, pasakwapisimowinah !" itwéw wisahkétsdhk. 
“ kakway pasakwaipisimowin ?” itwaéw sistp. 
wisahkatsahk omis iway: “nimindnah,” itdw. 
“ nimihinan,"' itwéw sisip; “ nko-pasakwapisimunan fp” 
“hay hay !” shodw wisahkatsahk : “ah, miywasin dh-kitimakina- 
wiydk, nisimitik | nam dwiyak nidpwahtakuh, ‘ta-nimihitutsik, kayas 6-kth- 
asulamén ta-nimihitowinihkayan, ” “iwdw wisahkdischk ; “dkusi péa- 
apaik. 

_ ta-sipwihtdwak dkwah sisipak mina niskak. kehkiyaw ituhtéwak. 

umis itwéw wisahkdtsahk : “ matsi-kakdpatisak, ninuhtahkatdwa | mis- 
tahi nika-mitsisun |” itéythtam wisahkdtsdhk. 

Gh-apit, dkutah takuhtéyiwah. 

“Gh, dstamitik, nisimitik 1? itwiw wisahkdtsahk. ; 

dkwah d-sipwahtdt, d-sakdyik ch-ituhtét, mthtah itah dh-mihtsdéniyikih, 
dkutah takuhtéw. 

“ha, nisimitik, utinamuk mihiah,” itwéw. 

tapwd utinamwak mihisdt, dkwah d-usthtdtsik wikiwaw, dkutah Gh- 
apahkwatsik oh6 asisiyah. apisasiniyiw iskwahtamis. 

“ha, dkwah, nisimitik, pihtukak,” itwéw; “ nikdn ta-pihtukdwak 
niskak akwah ka-misikititsik seipak, ” tiwewy “ sshd dyékumk ah- 
ukimawitsik,”’ itwéw. 

waskwahtamihk cékust mist ttapiytwah, iuaha niskak. naté isk 
wahtimihk, dyakunik dh-apisisisitsik dkutah apiwak. dkwah kipaham um 
iskwahtém awa wisahkdtsahk, “ akah ka-wayawitsik,” ch-ttéyihtahk. akwah 
mateo wisahkatsahk. 

“ misimitik, kinandskumilindwaw, d-kisihtayak omah mikiwahp. . ak 
adwiyak Gh-kitimakinawit, kiyawaw ké-kitimakinawtydk, ” twa, ah-matut. 

dkusi poni-matow. N 

mist itwéw wisahkdtsdhk: “ hdw, nisimitik, . dtah tawayihk. nika- 
nipawin; nika-nikamun. nikamuydnih, ka-nimihitundwaw. iyikuhk 
poni-nikamuyanih, dkuyikuhk ka-téhkapinawiw., kispin manitow nipdtsi- 
maw, ‘hweh hweh hweh !’ nik-dtwan; dkutah ‘sdhkch ka-nimihitunawéw, 
pahtawiyaleuh, dkusi itwéyanth,”’ ' 

“dha; itwawak. 
- Gkwah ‘ mistile tahkunam-witsahkdtsahk, nipiyah d-kaydsaytwiyikih Gh- 
takupitéyikih,. dmisi dy-isiwépinahk, é-sdwépayiyikih, ldpiskéts : sasawihy- 


dkan, 6hi mapiyah. dkusi dkwah nikamow. . 
mis 8 atepaw : 
“ pasakivapisimowinah 


nipdisiwitin®) ” 
dkus ttwéw, dh-nikamut. 
dkwah ahi kahkiyaw dh-pasakwapitsik, ah-nimihitutsik, kitahtawd, 
“hweh hweh 1" ttwdéw wisahkdtsahk, dh-utinat d-misikitiyit ’ niskah, ah- 
kiskikwdpitat. dkus d-ati-wdsakamdt, ‘ahk Gh-nikamut, Gh-ati-kaskikwipitat 
niskah ohi mina sisipah ka-misikitiyit. néitéh * gkwahtémihk Gh-nimihitut 
, , NS eh 
2 Dausual word. , . NN 


\ ws 


- 36 - 
sthkihp, dwakuh ah-pdhtahk kékway, .dh-napatah-tohkapit, dh-nimihitut, 
ké-wapamat wisahkdtséhkwah dh-ati-nipahaytt. 
“qyahd 1” itwéw, “maka minah kimdstsihikunaw wisahkdtséhk !” 
itwéw. . Ss 
Gh-tohkapitstk kutakak, wmis ttwéw wisahkdtsahk : “ kékway Gma itah 
hé-padtayan nimihitowin, kakdpatisitsik' ? ninohtdhkatah !” tidw oht sisi- 
ah, 
? wayawiyamuwak kutakak, dh-tapasitstk.- 
dkusi wayawitw wisahkdtsahk, ah-pahpit, éh-miywdythtahk, “ mistahe 
nika-miisisun,” dh-itdyihtahk. dkusi pikunam uma wikih, ohi mihtah 
Gh-utinahk, dh-kutawdt, Ghth d-wih-nawatsit nipin-dyah. dkust éh-nawatsit, 
kahkiyaw nawatsiw. dkusi sim mistah éh~pinahk, adpwésiw. 

sipwahtaw, “ pitah nika-pon-dpwisin ; dkuyikuhk ta-kisiséwak niniski- 
mak,’ Gh-itéythiahk. . 

tapwah wahyawds Gh-ituhtét, kd-wapamat mahkdsisah d-wisakéythtam- 
iyit uskdtiyiw, dh-watiskayit, dka dh-kth-pimuhtayit, d-wih-tapasthikut. 

“tsiskwa, nisim 1” itdw. 

- “wah, namuya !” ith ; “usam méka mina nanitaw kiwih-tétawin, ” 
tk. 

“namuya !" itéw; “ d-wih-atsimustatan. th uma kiwdpahtin tsi 
mistaht kd-pikthtak ?” a 

“ dha’ ,” itth. Lo, 

“ dkutah mihtsét ninipahawak niskak mina stsipak, dkutah éh-nawatsi- 
yan,” Gah-itat; “ mistahi ka-mitsisundnaw,” itéw ; “ makah pitah ka- 
kakwé-nakatundnaw. ndéma wahyaw k-dspatindk dwakuh ka-téitipdwépah- 
taéndnaw, ”’ 

“hah, namuya ! kiwapamin dkah é&h-kth-pimuhtéyén, d-wisakdyth- 
tamdn niskat, ” itwiw mahkdsis. 

umis itwéw wisahkdtsahk: “ asiniyak niskatihk nika-tahkupitawak, ” 
ttwd , 

‘Nthe’ ,” ttwiw mahkdsis. 

asinlyah ulindw wisahkdtséhk, éh-tahkupitat uskdtthk. 

“haw, nisim, ékwah !” . 

dkwah sipwiépaht@wak. nakatéw mahkdsisah wisahkdtsahk. 

“héy, umihkawikth awa mahkdsis, kd-kitimakaskdtak nistm !  itdp 
Gtiht nik-dsamaw, dyikuhk ta-takupahiatsth,” ttwdéw wisahkdtsahk. 

mayaw dh-dkawiwét wisahkétsahk, kiwépayiw awa mahkdsis, namuya 
G-wisakdyihtahk uskdt, 6ma kd-pikihtdéyik dy-ispayit. dh-takuhtdt, niskah 
sisipah mina kd-wapamal aGh-kisisuyit. utindw, dkwah ch-miisisut, wisah- 
kdtsahkwah ch-kimutamawat unawatsiwiniyiwa. kitamwaéw kahkiyaw. usiti- 
yiwoh pikuh oht niskah dkwah stsipah, dkunth piku iskutahk astaw, “ ta- 
wapahtahk wisahkdtsahk,” Gheitéythtah. dkust tapasiw, “ nka-kisiwahaw, ” 
Gh-itiyimat wisahkatsahkwah, | , . 

akwah wisahkdtsadhk tyikuhk aéh-takuhtét mistah dpwdsiw ; ayisk mis- 
taht pimipahtaw. . 

“hay, dstépwdsiyanih nika-mitsisun,” dh-itdyihtah, “tap atiht nk- 
dsamaw nisim,” itéw mahkéstsah, “ iyikuhk takuhtdtsth,” itdythtam. 


_- The ending of the vocative plural is, of course, -itik. The sound ¢s for normal ¢ appears 
in diminutives (among the younger generation of speakers, almost universally); less 
often in other words formed with suffixes containing s (as in the present instance); and 
occasionally in other words, probably always with a diminutive touch. 


tA 


_ pasow. 


7 


37” 


namuya kiskdyihtam dsay dh-kitamwdyit uniskimah. dkusit dkwan 
utinam 6m ositiyiw. nama kékway niskah. 

“hd ha hay, nosamih-mdstihkaswaiw |” tiwdw. 

piyis kahkiyaw utinéw ; kahkiyaw nama kékway ; usitiyiwah piku. 

“ha ha héy, madka min dtsik Gnih éh-waydsihit mahdsthit mahkdsis, ka- 
kitamwat niniskimah | dkus dtsik dnih kd-nohtahkatéydn !" ttwéw ; “ ha 
hah, kikisitwahin, mahkdésis ! namuya ta-pihtsdw askiy itd tit-dtéimuwin. 
niya nikiy-usthtan askiy ; ka-miskdtin ; miskdtanih ka-kitamwatstk ninisk- 
imak !” itwéiw wisahkdtsdhk, dh-sipwdhtat, dh-niunawat mahkdsisah. 

namuya wahyaw dh-thiat, ka-wapamat, Gh-na-nipayit, mitunith Gh- 
mistataydyit ; ayisk kih-kispuyiwah. asiniyah utinéw, d-wih-pakamahwit. 

“yahé 1” ttwiw; “ nka-watokatahwaw,” itwdw ; “ nik-dtastutinth 
awa mahkdsisiwayaén !" itwiw ; “kiyam nka-pasisamawaw, ta-nipahdpa- 
sut 6m ohisi paskapahtéw, ” itwaw. ; 

na-nituhtak, 6m déhtat. dkust-kutawdéw, wasakdm d&-saskahahk masku- 
styah. Gkwah Gh-kwaéhkutéytk, waniskédw awa mahkésis. mistaht kaska- 


“he,” wisahkatsahk umis thwaw ; “hihe, mahti minah kitamuk 
niniskimak |” itéw. ; 
kuntah waskapayihow awa mahkésis, dh-kaskapahtiyik mistaht. piyisk 


‘namuya wapamdw wisahkdtschk. kwaskwépayihow awa mahkasis, iskutéiw 
“uma dh-pdstisi-kwaskuhtit, dh-tapastt. namuya wépamdw wisahkdtsahk, 


dh-tapasiyit. piyis misiwd pasitdyiw, Ghutah dhewaskahiat wisahkdtsahk. 
=" “Gpwd nikitimahaw, ch-nipahitkaswak mahkdsis,” itwéw wisahkét- 

sahk ; kd-wa@pahiahk pihkuh dh-astéyik, mustusu-méy itah ch-kiy-astiyik, 
“tdpwd nikitimakthkaswéw 1!” Gh-itwét; “ mahtih k-iskuhkasut, nka- 
mowaw, iskuhkasutsih,’’ ch-itéyihtah ; ‘wma pihkuh d-with-utinahk, “ ka- 
kisisut iskutéw ds 6mah dwaku mahkésis,” ch-iytéyihtah, ch-tsisihut. 

dkuyikyhk namuya kiskdythtam é-kth-tapasiyit. 

ékust dkuyikuhk dwaku dtaydhkdéwin. 

éh-tah-tahkiskawat sihkihpah,? “ haw, otah nikén ayisiyiniw kit-ohpikiw ; 
ka-wapamik uma ka-nanaputékandskatan. ‘ sthkihp’ kik-dsiyshkdtikwak. 


_namuya ka-miyusin ; usim kikisiwahin dh-wihtaman, ch-tohkdpiyan,” 


itéw. 
Gkusi dyoko. » 


Once upon a time, as Wisahketchahk was tramping along—as usual 
he was hungry—as he was tramping along, he saw some ducks and many 
geese, and ducks. _ 

Then this was what he thought: “How shall I kill them?” he thought. 

Presently he saw a little lake, and by the water’s edge some weeds. 
He took them and rolled them up. He tied up a great bundle of them, 
took it on his back, and went off. When he came walking close to where 
the ducks were, they caught sight of him. 

The ducks said, “Ho, our big brother! What is that he’s carrying on 
his back?” they said. 

“Suppose I ask him,” said one duck. 


1 Error? 

2 This paragraph was added in answer to a leading question. “I did not tell you that 
part,” he Tained. This is characteristic of our informant. Notice that even now he 
does not explain the diver duck’s red eyes. 


“Yes, do,” they said. 

“Big 'prother, what is that you’re carrying on your back?” 

He kept right on walking; just as if he had not heard, he kept on 
walking. 

Again the duck asked him, “Big brother, what i is it you *re carrying 
on your back?” 

Only then did Wisahketchahk stand still. 

“Say,” it said, “what is it you’re carrying?” 

“Why, Shut-Eye Dances!” said Wisahketchahk. 

“What is a Shut-Eye Dance?” said the duck. 

Wisahketchahk spoke thus: “A saltatory rite,’ he told the other. 


“Do you give us a dance,” said the duck; ‘‘Let us dance the Shut-Eye 
Dance!” 

‘Splendid!’ cried Wisahketchahk; “Oh, it ig fine that you have 
taken pity on me, little brothers! No one has given heed to me until now, 
and danced, when long ago I had pledged myself to give a ritual dance,’”’ 
said Wisahketchahk; “So then, come ashore.” ” : 


Off went the ducks and geese. Allof them came.’ < 


Thus spoke Wisahketchahk: ‘Hopeless ninnies, I’ve been starving! 
I shall have a big meal!” thought Wisahketchahk. 


They came to where he sat. 


“Ha, come here, little brothers!” said Wisahketchahk. 

Setting out and making for a clump of trees, he came to where there 
was plenty of wood for a fire. 

“Ha, little brothers, take up some faggots,” he said. 

Accordingly they took up a plenty and built themselves a lodge, 
which they thatched with those weeds. The little doorway was very small. 

“Ha, now, little brothers, come inside,” he said; “First the geese and 
the big ducks ‘will come in,” ‘he said; “Repecially those who are chiefs,” 

e sai 

Accordingly these, the geese, sat like this, at the far end, facing the 
door.’ Over at-the other end, by the door sat the little fellows. Then that 
Wisahketchahk blocked up ‘the doorway, thinking “So that they can’t 
get out.” Then Wisahketchahk wept. 

“Little brothers, I thank you for having built this lodge. When no 
one took pity on me, it was you who pitied me,” he spoke, weeping. 

Then he ceased weeping. ; 

Thus spoke Wisahketchahk: “Now, little brothers, here in the centre 
I shall stand; I shall sing. When I sing, you will dance; you will close _ 
your eyes. Not until I cease singing will you open your eyes. When I 
summon the spirit-power, I shall say, ‘Hwe, hwe, hwe!’ Then you will 
dance with all your might, when you hear me call thus.” 

“Very well,” they answered. 

Then Wisahketchahk took hold of a branch that had old leaves on it 
which rustled when he swung it, like this, just like a bell, those leaves. 
Thereupon he began singing. ns 

These were his words: . oo | 

“Shut-Eye Dances . . ‘ 
I bring here!’’. 
were the words of his song. 


39 


Then, when they all had closed their eyes and were dancing, presently, 
“Hwe, hwe!”’ went Wisahketchahk, taking hold of a big goose and wringing 
its neck. In this way, he kept on circling round, singing all the while, and, 


‘as he went, wringing the necks of the geese and of the big ducks. Over , 


yonder by the door danced Hell- Diver, and when he heard something or- - 
other, and opened one eye as he danced, there he saw Wisahketchahk 
killing one after another. 

“Yah!” he cried, “It’s the same old story, Wisahketchahk is killing 


us off!’ 


of a dance would I be bringing you blockheads? I was hungry, that’s all!” 
he said to those ducks. 

They fled out of doors, the others, trying to get away. 

Thereupon Wisahketchahk went out of the lodge, laughing and 
rejoicing, thinking, ‘‘I shall eat a plenty.” So then he tore up that lodge 
of his, taking the faggots and building a fire to roast those summer creatures. 
He roasted them whole. Having made too big a fire, he began to feel hot. 

He went off, thinking, “Fire, I shall get over feeling hot; by that time 
my geese will be done.” — 

And so when he had walked- a little ways, there he saw Fox, who had: 
a pain in his leg, and was limping and could not walk properly, as he tried 
to run away from him. - 

“Wait a moment, little brother!’’ he called to him. 

“Dear me, no!’ the other answered; “You are only going to play me 
some new trick,” he said to him. 

“No!” be told him; “It is only that I want to tell you some news. 
Do you see all the smoke rising over here?” 

“Yes,” said the other to him. 

“Over there I have killed a lot of geese and ducks, and there ‘I am 
roasting them,” he told him; ‘We shall have plenty to eat, ” he told jbim; . 
“But first let us race. Let us run around that hill not far from here.” . 

“Oh dear, no! You see I can’t walk, with my sore leg,” said Fox. 

Wisahketchahk spoke thus: “TI shall tie stones to my leg,’’ he said. 

“Very well,” said Fox. 

Wisahketchahk took some stones and tied them to his leg. 

“There, little brother, come on!’’ 

So they set off at arun. Wisahketchahk left Fox behind. 

“Hey, I thought this Fox was a runner, this poor little brother of mine 
whom I am leaving so far behind! I shall give the poor fellow a few of 
them when he arrives from his run,” said Wisahketchahk. 

As soon as Wisahketchahk was out of sight behind the hill, that Fox - 
turned back, and his leg was not sore at all, as he made for ‘the rising 
emoke. When he got there, there he saw the’ geese and ducks a-roasting. 
He took them and ate, robbing Wisahketchahk of his roasts. He ate them 
all up. Only the feet of those geese and ducks, only those did he put into 
the embers, thinking, “Let Wisahketchahk see them.” Then he made for 
safety, thinking of Wisahketchahk, “He will be angry at me.” . 

Then, when Wisahketchahk arrived, he was very hot; for he had 
had quite a run. 

“Hah, when I am no longer hot, I shall eat,”” he thought; “I shall 
. give my little brother a few, too,” he said of Fox, “when he gets here,” 
he thought. 


When the others opened their eyes, Wisahketchahk said, ‘‘What sort — 


po 40 


He did not know that the other had already eaten his geese. So now 
he took one of those feet. There was not any goose. 

“Oho, I have overcooked him!’* he said. _ : 

At last he took them all out; every one was gone; only the feet were 
there. aed OT 

“Oho, it’s surely Fox-has been fooling me again, eating up my geese! 
And so I am to stay hungry!” he cried; “Ho, you have got me angry, Fox! 
The earth will not be big enough for you to escape. It was I created the 
earth; I will find you; and when I find you, who ate up my geese!” cried 
Wisahketchahk, as he went off to look for Fox. 

He had not gone far, when he saw him taking a nap, bis belly all big; 
for he had eaten a hearty fill. He took up a stone, to strike him. 

“Yah!” he said, “I shall ruin his hide,” he said; “I might as well 
have a cap of his fox-pelt!’’ he said; “I had better make a fire round him 
80 that he chokes in the smoke,” he said. 

' The other was listeriing to what he said about him. So then he made 
a fire, setting fire to the grass round about. When the blaze came, Fox 
got up. The smoke was getting too thick for him. 

“Ha,” said Wisahketchahk; “Haha, just you eat up my geese again!”’ 
he said to him. 

Fox dashed about in a circle, this way and that, as the smoke grew 
denser. At last Wisahketchahk could see him no more. Up leaped Fox, 
jumping across the flame, and making for safety. Wisahketchahk did not 
see how he ran away. At last there was a big fire, and Wisahketchahk 
kept walking round it.» —- 

“T have surely put an end to Fox; burning him to death,” said Wisah- 
ketchahk; and when he saw the ashes lying, where there had been buffalo- 
dung, “Surely I have burned him to a sorry end!” said he; “I shall eat, 
what is left of him, if there is any of him left from the fire,’ he thought; 
and he was going to take up-the ashes there, thinking, “And this must be 
Fox, burned up in this fire,” as he deceived himself. - - 

Even now he did not. know that the other had got away. 

And so this is the end of this sacred story. 

When he kicked Hell-Diver, “Now then, ahead in future time mortal 

_, taan will grow up; he will see here on you where I have kicked your rump 
crooked. ‘Hell-Diver,’ they .will..call you. . You will not be handsome; 
too much have you angered me by telling this and by opening your eyes,” 

he told him. , . Ne, 
So much for this, 


\ 


(7) Wisahketchahk as a Captain ~ oo 


Louis Moosomin 
nih-namiskwakapaw. : 
kitahtawé dsah sa-sipwahtaw ; ayisk misiwd kih-totam wisahkdtsahk. 
ahpoh ki-kaskihtaw ch-undtinikdwukimawit. 
kétahtawd sipwihtaw dsah. &, papamuhtéw., Kitahtawd waskahikan * 
kah-otihtahk. 


waroperly  Wetockade”’; used of the trading-post forts, and of white men’s houses 
ge y. This is the first of many foreign features in this tale: Wisahketchahk ia here 
among white people. : 


41 


“ay, dy-apt, ay-apt, nistdsd |” 

aékwah tapwiéh apiw dsah. nténikdyiwa iskwawa, dw-asamikut, hah, 
namwats kadkway wapahtam kit-otinamiyit mitstwin ~saskwats tapiskwak- 
anikinwah utindyiwa, uta mitsisuwinahtikuhk dsiwipinayit. wapahtam 
Gkutah nandtuhk mitsiwinah. 

mika mina itdythtam wisahkdtsahk ; ‘“nka-kimutin,” itéyihtam. 


mad-mituniyihtam tanist t-dsi-nohtd-nipdyit shi ka-pé-kiwukawét. 

omis twaw: “ haw, kiyawaw, nisimitik, néww-tipiskaw kik-Gtsimusta- 
lindwaw.” 

“hd, tapwd, nistésd, nimiywdyihtindn Gh-dtsimuhk !" itik Ghih 
iskwawah. 

nama withkdts wapamdw ta-kisitépuwit. 

“ nika-kimutamawdw, nipatsih, uapiskakandkineah, ” iy-itdyihtahl 
dsah wisahkdtsahk, ékwah dtsimow kapé-tipisk. 

namuya ohist nipdytwa. dsay mina kapd-kisik Stsimow. kihtwam 
mina Gh-tipiskdyik, dsay mina kéyapits namwats nipayiwa. 

“mén aka nka-kth-kimutamuwahtayik |” 

mwdhtsi néu-tipiskaw Gh-itsimut, dkuyikuhk nipayiwa bhi uskinikisk- 
wiwa. niunikaw utasiwatsikaniyihk ; kimutamawéw. dkus isi sipwih- 
tayimdw ; tapastw. 

néwu-tipiskaw pimipahtaw. dkwah kitahtawé kd-paéhiahk d-matwd- 
tsikahikawiht. 

“ yhisitaw kik-dtihtitin,’ itdythtam dsah. 

dékwah sipwihidw. dsay mina éh-wapaniyik, ahisi piku péhtam. akwah 
piyisk néwu-tipiskdw tapiskéts pdéyakwan tyikuhk d-matwd-tsikahikdyit, 
néwu-tipiskaw mwdhtst d~pmuhtdt, dkuytkuhk wapamdéw kikisép, é-matwé- 
waskahikanthkdyit. namwdis kékway waipahiam kita-usihtayit mihtah, ata 
niwu-kistkéw dh-péhtahk. nisu piku mihiah kiyastéyiwa. 

“ wah, nisim, kayds uhisi, ndwu-tipiskdw aspin, kd-pdhtaman d-nikuh- 
téyin 1” 

Gh-dtah-kitétat, namwats ahpoh wih-kitapamik. kapd-kisik pikw %st 
dtah dy-isi-kitotat, ahpoh namwdts wi-kitapamik. niawats Gkwah, d-wih- 
lipiskdyik, aspin Gh-astdyit tstkahikaniyiw, dh-dta-nawaswaiat, namuya 
kiskéyimdw a&h-pihtukdytt. namuya miskawdw ; wanihéw. 

misiwd papdmitdtsimow, “ nisim, kikitimahin !” éh~papdy-itwat, ch- 
papdmitatsimut, d-wih-kakwé-ka-kitutikut, dh-ntawdyihtahk ta-kitutikut. 

piyisk dtukd nastuhkwasiu. hawthkwasiw. sdsay mina kayahia éh- 
waniskat, ki-nd-ndiwdéyinihtéyiwa. dsay mina kapa-kisik Gta, “‘ nisim 1” 
pikw ist Gh-Gt-ttat, nama wih-ka-kitutitk. dsay mina d-tipiskayik, aspin at d- 
kiwdytt, ati-mitsimindw ; ; dh-ati-pihtukéyit wikiyihk, dkutah uhtsi wanihdw. 
dsay mina kapé-tipisk papamitatsimow, d-niunawat ; piyisk mina muhisthk 
Gkust ist nipdw. kakisépad dh-waniskat, dsay mina kih-nikubtayiwa mina 
kihtwam. 

“ anuhts akwah Ohisitaw kika-kitusin |” itdyihtam dsa maka mina 
wisahkdtschk. 

dsay mina kapd-kisik dta dh-kitutat, nama ki-kitutik, dsay mina ati- 
kiwéyiwa. mistaht ékwah pakwatam. kisisin. 

“ Ghpoh 6m' 1” itdéythtam ; “ kéhtsinaw apiw ! istpay aka ka-wth-ka- 
kitusit ! h itdyihtam dsah, 


“1 Meaning not clear; record may be wrong. 


42 


tapwa mahtakusRam uskan, ékutah d-miskahk, 

dkwah kikisépa kayahté dh-pdkupayit, “ awas, wisahkdtsahk ! kotami- 
hin ! nimiywaythtah ch-tsikahikdydn !" k-dtikut, kaydhtd d-matakuskawét. 

‘“tsaskwa, nisim |” itéw; “ nisim, mistaht kikakwatakihin, Gta néu- 
kistkaw Gh-kitutctan, aka dh-kitusiyin. ”’ 

“ haw, nstdsd,”’ ittk, “ otah d-kih-nipahisuyan, ” ittk ; “ dwakuh.” 

“tandhki maka dkaé kaékway k-oh-kaskihtayin, tahkih d-nikuhtdyin 
tahtu-kisikaw ?” ro. 

“ 6tah kayas d-kth-pahkwékahaman nisit,”’ ttik dsah. 

* namuya wihkdis tst kimitsisun ? ” 

“ cha’ ,”’ itwdw awa tsipay ; “ tantéh maka kiw-chtinamdn mitsiwin ?” 
iliw wisahkétsdhkwa.  - . 

“ asamikawiyan tst maka, kikah-mitsisun ?”’ ray 

“ aha’ , nikah-mitsisun, kispin asamiyin,”' itwéw dsah awa tsipay. 

“ haw, nisim, kik-dsamitin !” 

akwah éma ka-kth-kimutit tapiskakandkin utinam, éh-taswékiwapinahk. 
atéspuwinahtikuhk! pétih kahkiyaw kékway wdpahtam. tanispihk- dtukd 
omitsisuhtay awa isipay ! ayisk wisahkdtsahk k-dsi'yihkasut kahkiyaw awiya 
kih-waydsimdw. ° 

mistahi naspits atamihdw ch-asamat. . 

“ha, mistahi kitatamihin? wisahkdtsahk, oma k-dsamiyan !” 

ha, nisim,”’ itaw, “ niya nipapdmadisihun. nama nantaw nik-dtdpat- 

sthtan 6ma tadpiskakandkin. kiya nama nantaw ka-kih-uhtinamadsun ta- 
mitsiyin, ” itiw bhi tstpaya. ; ; 

“Gha’,” itwéw awa tsipay, “ mistahi kitatamihin, wisahkdisahk ! 

_ Gkwah nama wihkais nka-nohtéhkatan, wisahkatschk. mahtih nimistikow- 
Gtihk uséwi-siniydw dkutah miskawatsth, utindhkan, ” itwiw awa tsipay. 
tapwd wisahkdtsahk d-sithkimtht, ntuntkiw usadwi-séniydwa. 

“ wisahkdtsahk, kakwé-iyinisth maka ! dita wiyah kimbhisbwin. otah 
kwaski-sakahk namuya wahyaw ukimdw mékwéh kwapahwéw sdniyawa. 
Gwaku kik-dtuhtan. kikd-na-ntawdpaméw. Odmisi kik-dtaw: ,‘ niyanan 
tapwd miyusiw ka-kwadpahwayahk usdwi-sdniydw,’ kik-dtaw ; ‘ kiya mis- 
taht mdydtisiw. kakats pisisik nipiy kikwapahin,’ kik-itaw ; ‘ niyanén 
usiwi-siniyaw pisisik nkwapahwaw,’ kik-dtaw; ‘dkwah kiya ‘kakdats 
pisisik nipiy kkwapahén. nawats itah siniyéw k-dhtinak kistah péy-ituh- 
tdyin,’ kik-dlaw. dkwah wahyaw pdéy-ituhtahatst, kika-nipahdw. ‘ k-dsind- 
kusit awa ukimaw, dkust nika-wih-sindkusin |’ kik-dtwan. itép ka-naspit- 
awaw. 

dkust sipwihtdéw, a-kth-kakdskimikut wisahkdtséhk shi tsipayah, dkwah 
ukimawa d-wth-ntawi-nipahat. tépwéh namuya wahyaw dy-ituhtat, stpisis 
utthiam, d-mikwd-kwapahwayit séniyawa. 

 tapwa kiya mistaht maydtisiw séniyaw ke-kwapahwat,” itwéw wisah- 
katsahk ; ‘“dkwah miyandn mistahi miyusiw soniydw; ‘usdwi-sbniyaw 
pikuh nétindnan. ” . . 

“tanta maka mahtih?” itik ; “ ituhtéhin. mahti nka-ntawdpahtén, ” 
ilk. kdkwah Gh wapahtéhéw. “ ninan usaiwi-séniyaw pikuh notindnan, ” 
itik. 

The ordinary term is milsiséwinahtik ; the word in the text resembles Ojibwa 
»adohpowin ; Cree atéspow, Ojibwa adéhps: “he eate on something,” initial stem atl: 
on something,” transitive verb final -pw-: “by mouth,” with middle-voice verb deriva- 

? Literally, “You delight me,’’ the usual formula of thanks. 


oot 


43 . 


dkwah téipwé sigevéhtahaw ; ; tah dah-dyimantyik atth-ay-ituhtahéw, 
Gkwah wahyaw dh-aydtsik, mistikwah nisu dh-tsimasuyit, dkutah d-sdkuyit, 
ustikwaniythk pakamahwaw ; nipahaw. 
“ Gkust nka-with-naspitawaw awa ukimaw !” itwiw dsah wisahkdtsahk. 
tapwd, ayisk witsthik ohi tsipayah ; tépwd naspitawdw dsah ohi ukimawa. 
“akwah mahtih simak nka-kiwan.  mahtih dsindkusiyit wiwah,’”’ 
itéythtam. 
atsiyaw piku kwépahwéw soéniydwa. wawdyiw; dkus ast kKiwéw. 
wahyaw uhisi pdtsipamik bhi ka-nipahat wiwiyiwa. 
 ténist k-6h-pd-kiwéyin ? nama wihkdis nohiaw kipd-kiwan. iyikuhk 
nisusap tipahikan mana ka-pd-dpihta-kisikaw-mitsisuyin. _ mistahi kitahtawad 
kimohisowin |” 
dia wiyah dsa nisituhtawéw. dkwah dkus ist kiwiw. mina Maw- 
ituhtéw. atsiyaw pdy-otihtik bhi ka-ki-kiskinodhamakut tstpayah. 
“ kéhtsind wipats kika-nipahikawin ! usim mistahi pakahkam kinith=. 
mohtsowin ! namwats ahpoh kikiskiyimaw pisimuhkan !” itik. 
ékwah wdpamdéw pisimuhkéna, dkuydk ka-nisitawéyimat. dékwah 
kiwdw, nisusdp upahikan dy-~spayiyik. dsay mina ntaw-diuskiw, min G- 
ntawaépamat siniyawa. dkwah wipats pén-atuskdéw. 
“tapwé kitahtawé mistahi -kimGhtséwin,” itik Ghi uwikimakanah, 
“ dkwah with-wipats ch-pd-kiwayin !” ittk. 
“hah,” 6mis itwéw; “kitahtawé wé-wipats kékway ntwah-wani- 
kiskisin, ” itwdw. ; . 
ékw dh-utakusiniyik, masinahikan kd-pithtukatdyit. namwats nisitaw~ 
inam. kd-kiskisit anthi tsipayah ka-kih-kitimakdyimikut, dkwah wayawiw. 
“wahwa, mistahi kiméhtsowin |” tik ; “ dkus dtstk dna wipats ké- 
nipahikawiyan |" . 
; sd-sdminamiyiwa ohkwakana, uskisikwa, utén: nisitawinam masinah- 
tkan. dGkwah éh-wipahtahk, masinahikatéyiw, wapahkih é-wih-pd-notiniht ; 
ayisk unotinikdwah! ohi ukimawah kd-nipahat, dkwah wah-wipats dsah 
mana Gh-pah-notinimiht. masinahikéw ; dtsimustawdw utinima. 
tapwa, ‘ ‘wawdyik, tyinitik. kiwth~pé-nétinikundénaw* wapahkth. nipay- 
ttisahamdkawin, ” itdéw, “ masinahikanah. ” 
tapwd kikisépa tokuhtéyiwa ké-péh-ntupayistékutstk. maka wiya 
wisahkdtsahk maka mina ka-kitapahkiéw kuniah. 
kitahtawéh Omis itik oh iskwéwah: “ tapwd mistahi kimohtsowin. ! 
kitiyinimak wi-mdstsihdwak,” itik ; “ kitayéwinisah ta-sthkihkdmuyan kit- 
dtinamthk, ta-pusiskaman, mina kit kita-wiyahpitiht. ” 
tapwd wisahkdtsahk sthkihkémow utémah ta-wiyahpitimiht. wiyah- 
pitimawa. pustayowiniséw ; nitawi-notinikdw. mistahi maka mina 
mohtsthkdséw. kahkiyaw dsah méstsihdw Ghi kd-pdé-notinikdyit. dkust 
pdyak pikuh kiwétisahwéw, masinahikan d-kiw-6sihtat. > 
nitéh dh-takuhtatatsik,? émis ttwdwak utiyinisiwak : 
wisahkdtsahk !” itwaéwak. ; 
masinahikan usihtaw: “kispin kiya wisahkdtsahk, kiwih-nipahitin 
Siskwats. usdm misiwé kitisthtstkan.” ~ 


‘maka min dtuké 


1Should be obviative; I may have mis-heard a form undtinikdyiwah, but do not 
know if such would be the obviative of this preterit. 
‘his would seem to mean “he (or it) will come to fi ht us”; probably read kiwth- 
pi-nitinkwniae “we shall be come to and fought with’ ” (passive). 
dis 3 Why plural actor? The rest of the story is obscure because the persons are not kept 
tinct. 


44 


pot dkwah h ah-pétamaht wisahkdtsahk, ayamihia. a 

" kiy dtuké maka mina, wisahkatsahk, dma ka-tétaman, ” itdw. 

tapasiw ; namuy ahpoh awiyah “‘wapahtahaw oma masinahikan ; ; akug 
ist éy-isih-tapasit, on 

néu-tipiskaw pimamou. kitahtawd d-misdyik sakahikan adw-utihiahk, 
 Gkust ka-kth-ititan, ‘ wisahkdtsahk mika min dtukd kiya,’ ka-kiy-ctitan, ” 
itik ayisiyiniwah, ah-nakiskawat sisund sékahikanihk ; “haéw, wisahkdt- 
sahk, ka-matawandnaw !” tik,  * 

dkwah ldpwd kakwdtsimadw tanist kit-dsi-mdtawdistk. 

“ waskits nipihk ka-pimuhtananaw, Paik, 
“ dha’ ,” ttwéw wisahkdtsahk, . 
tdpwd ati-sipwahtivw awa wisahkdtsahkwah ké- mawindhwdat. namwats 
ahpd wayiskam nipiy. akdmthk éh-kth-takuhtit, dkutd uhtst tépwdtéw 
' wisahkdtsahkwah: 

‘haw, mwdhtst tawakdm aydtsih wisahkdtsdhk, dkutah ntawi-kihta- 
payiw ; mika namuya niwih-nipahdw. Gkutah nipthk ta-mitsimwatsth- 
nahapiw !’ 

apwah itdmi-nipthk dkhuté nahapiw, itamihk mapihk hahkiyaw kdkway 

ch-atutdt, nama wiya tépwahtak. : 

hahkiyaw, § ‘nkustinan ka-totask,” itik. v4 

kitahtawé ,makwah ka-tépayimut ‘kit-otinat wisahkatsahkwah. utinik 
dyakunth, akusi pimatsthik. 


Once upon a time he went ‘from place to place; for Wisshketchahk 
did all kinds of things. He even managed to become a captain of soldiers. 


. Orce upon a time, the story goes, he set out. Well, he tramped about. 
Presently he came to a wooden house. 

“Ha, stay a while, stay a while, big brother!” 

So-he stayed there. A woman looked for something to give him to 
eat. Ho, he saw nothing at all in the way of food that she could take. 
At once she took out a shawl and threw it on the table. There he saw all 
kinds of food. 

- Tn his usual way, Wisahketchahk thought, ‘ ‘T shall steal it,” he thought. 
‘ Be kept revolving in Ais mind how he could make his hostesses want . 
0 sleep. 

He said, “Now, in. return, my little siaters, for four nights I will tell 
you stories. # 
to hi “Oh, indeed, big brother, we like story-telling!” those women said” 

o him. 

He never saw them do any cooking. .- 

“When she goes to sleep, I shall steal her shawl from “her,” thought 
Wisahketchahk, and told stories all night. 

But they did not go to sleep. All the next day he told stories. ‘When 
another night.came, again they did not sleep ‘at all. 

“Could it be that I should be unable to steal it from them!” * 

When he-had told stories for-exactly four nights and days, then those 
young women went to sleep. He searched ‘where they kept their things; 
he stole it from them. So then he went off with it; he fled. 

For. four days and nights he ran. Then at one time he heard someone 
noisily chopping. pod. . 


46 
“T shallfdo my best: to ‘reach you,” he thought. 


Then hdwent:on. When the next: day broke, ‘he still heard it. And 
at last, when\he had heard the other choppihg away for four days and 


nights, appareh{ly always at the same distance, and when he had walked - 
four days and nights, then at last, in the morning, he saw him, noisily — 


“working at a wooden structure. He saw no wood at all with which that 
person could build anything, though he had heard the noise of it for four 
days. Only two sticks lay there. 

‘Dear me, little brother, for a long time, ever since four nights ago, I 
have heard you chopping!” ; 

Although he spoke to him, the otHler would not so much as glance at 
him. Although through the day he addressed him in 4li manner of ways, 
he would not even look at him. And then, at nightfall, when the other 
laid down his hatchet and was off and away, he needs ran after him, but he 


could not make out into what place he had disappeared. He could not 


find him; he had lost him. 

He crawled about, and, “Little brother, you are making me desperate!” 
he kept crying, to make the other speak to him; desiring to have the 
other address him. Soe. 

At last he must have got sleepy from weariness. He fell, overcome by 
sleep. When he awoke, there was the other already a-splitting of logs. 
Again, though all day he kept saying to him, “Little brother!’ he would 
not talk to him. ‘When the next night came, when the other made off to 
go home, he held fast to him, but when her went into his dwelling, from 


that point he lost him. Again he crawled about all night, looking for him;- 


at last he again slept right there on the bare ground. In the morning, 

when he got up, this time, too, the other had already started working at 
is wood. . Se 

“Now today I will see to it that you talk to me Y thought Wisah- 


ketehahk, as before. 


Again, though he talked to him all day, he could not make the other . 


‘address him. Again the other went home. He was very much annoyed. 
He landed on something-sharp. Ene oo, 
“Maybe it is this!’ he mil ao conven is at home here! He isa 


dead man, this person who will not conyerse with me!” he thought.’ 
on that bone and held it down, 


“Get away, Wisahketchahk! You are keeping me back! 1 was having a 
by the weight 


dressed you.” _ ; _ 
“Well, brother,” the other told him, “It is because in ‘this place I 
killed myself,” he told him;. “That is the way of it.” me 
“But' why is it you accomplish nothing, when you are always a-chop- 
ping every day?” =” . ; 
“Tt is because of old in this place I chopped off my foot,”-the other 
told him. — —_ ; . 
_ 83186—4 - 


’ eo 


; 
| 
\ 


L. 


| 46 aT 

“Do you never eat?” a . 

“No,” said the dead man;~“Where could IJ get any food?” he said to 
Wieaheieha ive 

“But if-you were given something to eat, would you eat?” 

_--*Yes, I would eat, if you gave me food, ” said the dead man. 
eo “Very well, little brother, I shall give you something to eat.” 

. Then he took the shaw! he had stolen and spread it out. Look you, 
on a table he saw all kinds of things. I wonder when that corpse had-last 
eaten!. For he who-was called Wisahketchahk deceived everyone. 

He entirely won him over by giving him the food. i 

“Hah, you greatly oblige me, Wisahketchahk, giving me food like- ° 
this!” 

“Oh, little brother,” he told him, “as for me, I am travelling about. 
I shall not have any use for this shawl. But you would not have any 
resource from which to get anything to eat,’’ he told the dead man. 

“Yes,” said the dead man, “I thank you very much, Wisahketchahk! 
Now I shall never be hungry, Wisahketchabk, Go see; if you find any 
gold in my wooden box, just take it,” said the-corpse. - 

According as he was bidden, Wisahketchahk looked for gold. 

“But, Wisahketchahk, be sensible! After all, you are a crazy fellow. 
At the other side of these woods & chief is now ‘digging gold. You will 
go where he is. You will go see him. You will say to him, ‘The gold we 
others are digging is really. fine,’ you will say to him; ‘Yours ia very poor. 
You are scooping up almost nothing but water,’ you will say to him; ‘But - 
as for us others, I scoop up pure gold,’ you will say to him; ‘And you, you 
are scooping up almost nothing but water. You had better come over 
yourself to where I get gold,’ you will tell him. And when you have Jed 
him far off, you will kill him. ‘As this chief looked, so I'shall look!’ you 
will say. Then you will resembie him completely.” 

Then Wisahketchahk set out, as he had been directed by the. dead 
man, to go and kill that chief. And really, he had not gone far, when he 
came to a brook where the latter was digging for gold. - 

“Truly, the metal you are. digging up is very poor,” Wisahketchahk — 
told him; “But.our metal is very fine; we get nothing but gold.” 

“Now, where is that, pray?” the other answered him;’ “Take me 

_ there. Let me go see it, he told him. He showed him some. “We get 

4 nothing but gold,” he told him. 

2 So then he led him’ away; he led him on into rough places. Then, 
when they had gone quite a ways, as the other got between two trees. 
that stood close, he hit. him on the head and killed h 

“So ‘now I want to resemble this chief!’’ said Wisabketchehk. 

And really; for he was being helped by that Deadman, really, he looked 
exactly like the chief. . 

“Now I shall go straight home. Let me see what his wife looks like,” 
he thought. ~ 

He dug for gold but a short while. He dressed up; right then he went 
home.. From afar the wife of him whom he had killed saw him coming. 

“Why are you coming home? You never come home, before the 
regular time. It ig always only at twelve o’clock that you come home to 
eat dinner. . You are acting very crazily, all of a sudden!”’ 


wo. 
see 
2a . 


47 ” ae 

He did somehow understand what she was saying. Bo he went right 
back. He went back where he had come from. Boon the Deadman who 
had instructed him came to where he was 

“Certainly you will soon get yourself killed! ; It i is evident that you ; 
will act too crazily! You do not even know the clock!” he told him. 

Then he looked at a clock, making his first acquaintance with it. 
Then he went home, when twelve o’clock had come. Then he went back 
to work, to look for gold. He quit work after a short time. ~ 

“Really, of a sudden you have gone altogether insane,” that wife of 
his said to him, “coming home early all the time like this!’ 

- “Why,” he said, “my t memory has become very short, all of a sudden.” 

Then; in the evening someone brought in a letter. He could make 
nothing of it. Remembering that Deadman who had befriended him, he 
went out of the house. 

“Alas, you are a crazy fool!” he told hirn; “And 20 it appears you will 
soon be killed!” 

The other touched. his face, his eyes and his mouth; he could read. 
Then, when he read it, it was written that tomorrow people were coming 
to fight him; for that chief he had ‘killed had been. at war, and had been 
- attacked, it ‘seemed, every little while. He wrote; he told his followers 
the news. - 

“Get yourselves ready, men, Tomorrow they are coming to fight UB. 
Letters have been sent to me.’ 

Afid really, in the morning they arrived who were coming to make war ’ 
against them. But as for Wisahketchahk, of course, he merely looked on 
’ in his useless way; 

Presently that woman said to him, “Truly, you are entirely foolish! 
Your men will all be killéd,” she told’ him; “You ought to order. your 
clothes to be taken out for you to put on, and your horse to be saddled.” 

So Wisahketchahk ordered his horse to be saddled.” It was saddled. 
He put on his clothes: he went and fought. Of course he carried on in a 
crazy way. He killed all those who had come to fight. He sent only one © 
back home, having written a letter. 

When they arrived over there, the wise men said, “Doubtless this j is 
Wisahketchahk, up. to his old tricks!” 

He wrote a letter: “If you ate Wisahketchahk, I shall kill you without 
delay. You are cutting up altogether too much.” 

When it was brought to Wisahketchahk hé read it. 

“Doubtless it is you, Wisahketchahk, up to your old tricks, who are 
doing all this,”’ he was told. 

He fled; he did not even show anyone this letter; he fled just: as he ~ 
was, at once. » 

He ran. four days and nights. Then, when he came to.a big lake, “I 
* told you (BO, ‘Doubtless you are Wisahketchahk, up to your old tricks,’ I 
told you,” ’ gaid a man to him, whom he met by the shore of the lake; “Now, v 
Wisahketchahk, let us have a contest!’ he said to him. ,.' 

"So he asked him in what way they were to contend. 
“We shall walk on the surface of the water,” the other told him. .. 
“Very well,” said Wisahketchabk, 


BH . “ 


fe 4 
ee: | 


| 7 

Accordingly he started out who had challenged Wisahketchahk. He 
did not even ripple the water .as he stepped. When he reached the other 
side, from there he shouted to Wisahketchahk. ; 

“Now, when Wisahketchahk is right in the middle ‘of the water, he 
will sink under water; but I do not mean to kill him. Let him sit down 
there for good, theré‘in the water!” ; 

And really, there he sat down, under water. When he called every 
kind of being to help him, they did not, heed him. 
Everyone told him, “We fear him who is doing this to you.” 


At last the loon consented to take Wisahketchahk from where he was. _ 


He took him‘out. So he saved his life. 


5? 


(8) Wisahketchabk and the Bear ~ 


- Adam Sakewew 
sikdwéw . : ; 
Kitahtawd wisahkdteahk, “ hah, mahtih nik-dsihtan ; usim kitahtawd 
nikd-mdkuhikun kékway,’ itéyihtam. 

usthiaw misdskwat ; usihtdw-atsusisah. 

“' kikway kd-kinikak dkutah kit-astayan,” itiythtam. 


kitahtawi miskam mistik, mihtah 6ma tapiskots. napakihtak isthtaw : 


lapihtitiw mihtsdt. 

“ dkust |” iéyihtam ; “ nik-th-minahun kita-mitsisuydn, ” itéyihtam ; 
“Gd, kisdts minah tsdpihtsikanis nik-osihtan ; dwaku mina nik-6sthian, ” 
itwaw. ; ° 

d-kisihlat, “ dh, minah napakihkuman nik-dsihtan ; usém miywdsin awa 
mistik kit-dh-usthidyan,”’ itdyihtam. cia 

usthiaw mohkuman, napakihkuman.” 


Gkwah d-wapahtahk unimaskwakanah, “ ptand ‘moskistawit,! moskist- 


Gkawiyan 1" itéyihtam; “usém miywasinwa nnimaskwakana 3 nama 
kikway nika-kustin,” itéyihtam. : a 

G-ki-kisthiat, sipwdhiaw. pasdhtsdhk akamihk dkuté wipaméw wakay- 
Gsah. hd, kiskiyihtam é-matsihtwayit.. . 


“d, nika-kisimaw, tipwalak ; dkusi nika-nipahaw ; nika-muwéw,” 


ttéyihtam, ; 

dkwah bmisi itiw: “ awdna néha?” tipwiw, “ kd-waipikiskitsdt {" 

Gh-pdhtahk awa wakayés, kisimaw. ; 

“ mahtih tanité ké-laqwahk 1” itéyihtam. - ; 

nam dwiya wipamdw. kdsow wisahkitsahk. kihtiwam ah-ménahikdyit, 
“mahtih nka-kakwi-wapamdw awd kdy-isit,”’ itdyihtam2 dkwah sipd 
Smisi lotam, dh-watihkdt ; 6tah usdpiw. potih kd-pimi-sakiskwat. wapamik 

ay. ° Way 

“ hawina nahd ka-wapikiskitedt 1 itdw. 
haw, wipamdw ayisiyiniwah ; moskistawdw. dkwah awa wisahkatsahk 
pimakimipitéw upihtatwana, kisiwak stay d-pd-nakiyit, pimwdw. nat 
wahtin 6ma mistik. wipisisah piyisk mastinam. ~ 


+ A slip of the tongue; the dictator corrects himself in the next word. 
not kept spart. « 


*1.e., the bear; the next sentences are obscure because third person and obviative ar 
‘ : . _ f 


a 


ine 
* 


ets 


cs 


_ awéw. 


S 49 


" dha’ , ha-pa-pdyakuniméshuidwinthk kiy-aythtiyan, ka-kth-wawan- 

ihth 1 -¢téw,. 

utinam. isipihtsikanis ; tahkamdw. 

Gh-tahkamtht awa wakayos, “mam 1" itwdw. \ 

* ndtwéhtitaw. , 

1 4 ka-pa-pdyakuntmaskwawinahk- kih-ayihtiyan, ka-ki~waiwwdnihih 1” 
itaw. - — 
; tahkamdw om ohtsi napakihkumdn mistik ka-kth-usihiat ; ndtwahtini- . 
ywe —, : 

dkusi édkwah sékihik, “ manitéww !" Gy-itdyihiahk. “ nika-nipahik 1” 
itéythtam ; “ ntsawats nka-tapasin,” d-ndtamututahk itah d-sakéyik. 

mitunt kistwak askok, dh-tdwatiyit. tydpasdpitsi, kisitwak askok. 
nipisiya ah-asaskitdytkih, dkutah itaimow. dkwah kasispokutsin awa wake- | 
yos. tétipiwapayihiw wisahkdtsahk. kapd-kisik dkutah wasakémdtisahuk. 
kitahtawd, néyawapitwawi, dyitaw nipawistatiwak. kitahtawd ka-wadpumdt 
dskanah; itah kd-pah-pimipahtat dkutah dh-méskatawahkiskawat. nakiw. 
man- ‘Goa waikayds wimaskawéw, mana kuntah é-wakastéyit awa wakagés. 
| + “ nakahkam awa wakayos, kustaw,” adyihtam awa wisahkdtsahk. 

mistahi nayowapiw. awa mina wakayés nayawapiw. ntsawéats tahkis- 
kawdw wisahkdtsahk ohi ka-kustimiht dskanah. piyisk pahkwatsiwdpisk- 


nitsawats ah-wimaskawaytt, “ Hustiw !” itéyihtam awa wisahkdisahk. 

utindty oht dskanah. 

“ nakahkam awa kustéw |” itéyihtam. 

nitsawdts ustikwanihk akundw, Omisi dh-itat bhi wakayodsch : “ hwhw' 1” 
Gh-itat, kd-waki-kwaskuhtiytt. 

“mahtih nika-moskistawaw ! nayawaprw 1” éh-itéyimat. muskist- 
awdw ; tapasiyiwa. 

iydpasdpiyitsih bhi wakayésa, hisiwak askéwdw, “hwhw !” céh-ttat. 

dkust mana wih-kakwé-mihkawikiw. ptyisk wapaméw wisahkdtsahk 
oht wakaydsah, pistéw utoniythk avespaie 1” yi © 

piyisk awa wakay os, “ kiyam naa i” itdythiam. * 


tih-nimisiwthat. ~ 

“ nakahkam kustéw |” itayihtam ; “ namuy awa uthkats ‘ta-wanishévo, 
nakatimakth shi nitiskanah, "' itéythtam. 

“hdéw, wakayds ! mistaht kitayimisun, ayisiyiniw miyakuhatsth. 
nista nitayan kdkway kit-Gh-nipahiian. ” ; 
h iGwvatinn wakayos, ispth ah-pdy-itisinimtht oht askanah, wipitah d-sama- 

amuht . . ' 

“ isatsémasinwa ohi kipitah 1” itéw wisahkdtsahk. 

': “haw, ntéskan, waépahwahkan awa tsatsimapitsis wakayds'! wépah- 
wahkan, mayaw waskawitsth otah uhtsi. kanawéyim ta-waskawit. kuntah 
notamihik ; nikiwutéwa |! médydkwam, ntéskan; kinisituhian uma 
wépahwahkan {” Lo 


a 


~~ 
1 Undulating velar or palatal: ‘epirant, with rounded lips; said to be the noise a buffalo 


makes when angry. 
ted, Slip of informant’s topgue, or-of f my hand, for wakayos : “the bear, ” and so trans- 


50 


‘dkust tsimahdw oh dskanah dtiskwdasiniytt. 

“ wapahwahkan, ntéskan ! niwth-sipwihtan. wapum awa wakayés ! 
—misawats kika-wdpahuk. édkusi kika-nipahik, mayaw waskawiyani |”! 

dkust tsimahéw dkuiah. nakatéw ; sipwdéhtéiw. 

dh-kth-pipuntyik ,kihtwam Gh-nipiniyik, “mahtih nka-ntawapamaw 
-nisim, ” ttdyihiam. 

ttuhtdw : awin Ghi ! kt-sikwaéhkatusuyiwa 6hi wakayosah. 

“heh ! dkust ka-kih-ttitan : misawdis ki-waskawiyin, sémak ka-kth- 
nipahikuh awa nitéskan |” : 

dkust dkuyikuhk dskwak atayohkéwin. 


Once upon a time Wisahketchahk thought, ‘Well, suppose I make 
some arrows; sometime something or other will drive me to close quarters.” 

He prepared a saskatoon willow; he made some arrows. 

“J ought to put something sharp on here,’’ he thought. 

Presently he found a stick of wood, like this faggot here. He made 
flat slivers of wood; he put them as tips on Many arrows. 

; “There!” he thought; “With these I shall kill game and have some- 
thing to eat,’”’ he thought; “Why, to be the better prepared, I shall make 
also a spear; this too I shall make,” he said. * 

When he had finished it, “Why; I shall make a broad-bladed knife, 
too; for this piece of wood is very good to make it of,” he thought. 

He made a knife, a broad-bladed knife. 

Then, when he looked upon his weapons, “I just wish he—~I just wish 
someone would attack me!” he thought; “For my weapons are very good; 
I shan’t be afraid of anything,” he thought. 

When he had finished them, he started out. At the other side of a 
ravine he saw a bear. Ha, he knew him for an ugly customer. 

‘Ho, I shall make him angry by calling to him; then I shall kill him; 
I shall eat him,” he thought. 

Then he called to him, ‘Who is that creature over there?” he shouted, 
“That white-rumped one!” 

When the bear heard that, he was angered. 

“Let me see from where this shouting comes!’ he thought. 

He saw no one. Wisahketchahk was hiding. When the other was 
back at his digging, he thought, “‘Let me try and see him who is saying 
this to me.” ‘Then down underneath there, he did like this, as he dug 
his pit; from here he looked forth. Sure enough, there he was, sticking ~ 
out his head. Already the other saw him. a 

“Who is that white-rump over there? Pshaw!” he called to him. 

Well, he saw a man; he made for him. Then that Wisahketchahk 
pulled round his quiver by the strap. When the other came to a halt 

--elose by, he shot an arrow at him. That stick of wood fell broken as it 
struck. Soon he used up all his arrows. 

“Yes, yes, if I were the kind of person who carries only one weapon, 
you would be the finish of me!” he called to him. 

“~~. Hle took his spear; he jabbed at him. 

When-the | bear was hit with the spear, “Mum!” he went. 

\ It broke as-he pushed it home. 

'  “¥f I were thé kind of person who carries only one weapon, you would 

be the finish of me!” he told him. 


\ 


51 


He made a stab at him with that flat knife which he had made out of 
a piece of wood; it broke lengthwise under the impact. 

At this, he grew afraid of the other, thinking, “He is supernatural!” 
“He will kill me!” he thought; “1 had better run away,” and he headed in 
panie for the woods. 

; The other was close at his heels, with gaping jaws. Whenever he 

glanced back, the other was close upon him. He fled to where some willows 
stood in a clump. The bear just missed as he jumped. Wisahketchahk 
dashed round the trees. All day long the other chased him round and 
round. Presently, whenever they were out of breath, they would stand 
facing each other, at either side. ‘Then at one time, he saw a horn from over 
which he had kicked loose the ground as he ran by. He stopped. The bear 
always made a detour round it, taking a crooked course for no evident 
reason. 

“Plainly this bear is afraid of it,” thought Wisahketchahk. 

He was badly out of breath. The bear, too, was out of breath. Wisah- 
ketchahk tried kicking that horn, which was an object of fear. At last 
he knocked it loose with his foot, as he passed. 

When the other with plain intent made a circuit round it, “He is | 
afraid of it!’ thought Wisahketchahk. . 

He seized that horn. 

“Plainly he fears it!’ he thought. 

He tried holding it on his head and saying ‘““Hwoo!’’ to the bear, and 
there, the latter jumped off at an angle. 

When he thought of the other, “Suppose [ go for him! He is tired!” 
he attacked him; the other ran away. 

Whenever the bear glanced back, he was close upon him, saying, 
“TWwoo!”? 

So he tried to run faster and faster. At last Wisahketchahk saw the 


~ -foanr dripping from the bear’s mouth. 


At last the bear thought, ‘‘Well, he might as well toss me on. his horn!” 

‘And the bear threw himself flat on the ground. He sat down facing 
him, holding out the horn at him, like this, while the other was almost 
dead, puffing for want of breath, and every time the other looked at him, 
he threatened him, going, “Hywyoo!” 

“Plainly he is afraid of it!’ he thought; ‘He will never get up, if I 
leave*this horn of mine here,” he thought. 

“Now then, bear! You ‘think a great deal of yourself, when you drive 
man to close, quarters. But I, too, have something with which I can 

ill you.” 

The bear had his mouth gaping, and the horn was stuck out at him 
till it touched his teeth. ; 

“Those teeth of yours are very short!’ Wisahketchahk told him. « 

“Now, my Horn, be ready to toss this stubby-tooth bear! Toss him 
as soon as he stirs from this spot. Watch his slightest move. He has 
delayed me for no reason; I was going visiting! Look sharp, my Horn; 4 
you understand what I say! Be ready to toss him!’ 

With that, he stuck the horn upright in the ground toward the bear's 
head, as he was lying. 


52 


“Be ready to toss him, my Horn! - J am going away from here. Watch 
this bear/—~You cannot avoid his tossing you. So then, he will kill you, as 
soon as you budge!’ 

So he stuck it upright there. He left it; he went away. 

When winter had passed and summer had come again, “Suppose I go 
have a look at my little brother,” he thought. 

He went there; what had become of him! That bear had starved to 


ath. . 

“Heh! That is what I told you: certainly, if you had budged, at once 

this Horn of mine would have killed you!” - | 
That is the end of this sacred story. 


(9) Wisahketchahk and the Rapids 


. Coming-Day 
ka-kisikdw-pthiukdw. ‘ 
“nisim 1" éh-wipahtahk pdwistik ; “ nisim 1” 
“way 1" ittk. ; 
“ tapwa nisipwéwdmun |? kitdythtén. kimawinéhutin, awina kiytpa 
kd-kihtimit, ” ctéw. _ 
‘ “a, namuya | iyikuhk ta~pin-dskiwik,| dkuyikuhk nikth-itik kohtawinaw 
tazkiskuwdydan, " ittk. 
| “4, maka kiwth-mawinghutin 1" At 
bmis Udyihtam : “ pipuhkih ta-kiskuwaw,” ch-itéyimat. : 
dkutah nahapiw dkwah wisahkdtschk, um dh-péhtdkwaniyik. dkwah 
umis tiwdw wisahkdéteahk : “ blblbIbDF 1” en . ‘ 
apiw dkutah. piyisk pipuniyiw. dhtsi pikuh dkutah apiw, pisisik dkus 
éh-itwat, “ biblblbl 1” AL ¢ 
piyis nipin. miyuskamiw., dkwah konah kahkiyaw'’ nama kdkway. 
Gkwah mistahi nipiy otah péy-ayadyiw, itah dh-apit. piyisk wmayikuhk* 
iskupaw nipiy. dkuyikuhk pasikéw, péyak askiy, “ blblblbl 1’ adh-itwat. ° 
Omis itwéw: “ watsistaka nama kih-dyiwakitunamaw, msim |” ttwdw. 
dkus Gh-sipwahtat. 
dkusih dkuyikuhk dyakow. / 


“Little brother!’ when he saw the rapids; “Little brother!” 

“Yes, what is it?” it answered him. ; 

“ ‘Truly, I keep long at my noise!’ you think. I challenge you to see 
which of us will weary first,” he told it. 

“Oh, no! When the green earth ceases to be, only then did Our Father 
tell me to cease from my noise,” it told bim. 

“Oh, but I mean to challenge you!’ 

He thought, “In winter it will stop’; that was what he thought of it. 

Then Wisahketchahk sa‘, down there where its sound was heard. 
And Wisahketchahk said, “Blblblbl!” 


1 Aa askiy means not only “earth,” but also “ "and “year,” double meaning 
and misunderstanding are probably essential to the atory. . . 
* Sound made by pulling tongue back and forth between rounded lips, with voicing. 
* Gesture to chest. 


53 


He sat there. At last winter came. Still he sat there, all the while 
saying, “Blbibibl!”’ 

At last it was spring. The thawing weather came. Then all the snow 
disappeared... Then much water came and was where he sat. At last he 
was up to here in the water. Only then he arose to his feet, having said, 
“Bibiblbl!” for a whole year. 

He said, “Incredible, how my little brother cannot be out-talked!’’ 

With that he went away from there. 

‘That is the end of this. 


(10) Wisahketchahk and the Magic Headgear 


Coming-Day 
ka-kisikaw-~pihtukdw. 
kitahtawd wisahkdtsahk éh-pmuhlat, kd-wapahtahk mikiwahp. 
dh-takuhtat, “ham ham!” itwéw. 
maka mina nohtéhkatéw. 


, dkwah nawatsiw. ; og 
wayawiw, “ mistahi nk-dtinén wiyds,” h-tiaythtahk. a 
nama kakway~mustusiwah ; sipwihtdyiwo. kdwih pihtukéw, dkwah 

dhemitsisutsik. oo, ae 
r sm, kakikd tstw umah kus dy-isi-minahuyin?” ttéw. 
' €éhe. nama wihkdts, wah-minohuyani, npapdmuhtan. dyako uma 
_ nipustastutinin, wah-minahuydnig dh-kituhtayan, ch-pdisimakik mustus- 
wak, ” itwityiwa. ; 
“Kah 1” itdw. ; ; ay eee t 
omis iUdyihtam wisahkdtsahk : “ nika-kimutamawaw ! itdyihtam ; 
“ nik-itsimustawaw, ta-ndhtdhkwasit, aka ta-kiskéyihtahk, kimutamawaki, 
itaythtam. : ; . ae 
4 dkwah ah-tipiskayik, dleimustawéw, d-wih-kakwd-nohtahkwastimat. ah 
kiskdyimat, ah-nohidhkwasiyit, dkwah - kawisimowak. nama uth-nipaw. 
mayaw dh-nipayit, utinam, dh-wayawihtatat om dstutin, ah-kimutit, ah- 
nayahtahk. dkus isi tapasiw. pah-pimipahtaw, kuntah ch-wd-wakuhiat, 


1 Probably the word mohkumdn: “knife” has dropped out in record, 


54 


" ahd ta-mitisit,’ Gh-ttdyimat. dkwah d-wih-wapaniyik, ttah éh-wayaht- 
sdyik, dkutah kawisimaw. 

‘“ kisikaki, pimuhidydnt, nika-wapamik, pé-nawaswasitsih, ” itdythtam ; 

“iyikuhk tipiskaki, nka-tapasin,” ah-itdythtahk, dkutah ka-kawisimut. 

mayaw Gh-pimisihk, nipdw, mitunth éh-papdtikusthk, dh-nayohtahk om _ 
astuin. 

kitahtawd, Gh-mékwa-napat, kuskuskuntk, “ nistisé, waniskah ! kiki-. 
piskawin. nivth-kutawan, ’ ’ Gh-~itikut. 


ds. 6ma pihtsayihk wikiyihk, itah ka-kutawdyit mana aGkutah ds omah 
kd-nipat. waniskaw. 

“yahd, nisim, .dkus dsi-kiskwéhkwasiskiyan !  awah' dGtuké kah- 
ulinaméin kiwiskwahpitakan 1? itiw, Gh-kdtowatat, kawih dh-tahkupitahk. 


“ uhtsitaw nka-kimutin, ” itdythtam. 


asay mina ah-tipiskaytk, dtsimustawdw, é-wih-kakwa-ndstuhkwastimat. 
dyikuh mina ah-nipaytt, asay mina ulinam, éh~wiwahut, Gh-lapasit. kapd- 
lipis pimipahiaw. “ miyamay wahyaw mitayan ” ah-itaythtahk, d-wih- 
wapaniyik, mistikwah dh-tstmasuyit, d-sakayik, “ dkutah nka-nipan,.”' 
idyihtam. dkusi nahapiw, mistikuhk Gh-aspatisthk. mis ist kiskipttam 
uskutakay, mistikwah 6hi éh-asitahpitisut. ahus isi dh-nipat. aspin pikuh 
ah-nipdt, kitahtawdé ka-kuskuskunikut. . 


4 1. . “pistdsg, waniskah hkotamthin ; mitastutin J niwth-kakwé-minahuh pn 
ii - 
ah-tohkapit, awin ama, pihtsdyithk kih-apiw, apaséhk éh-astahpisut. 
émis ttwiw : “yahé ! ékus 6ma mana éh-isi-kiskwihwasiskiydn, pikw 
dtukaé dh-utinaman kiviskwahpitakan, nisim 1!" itéw, Gh-pasikét, kdwih 
Gh-tahkupitahk. 


kiyipah utinamiyiwa, déh-kwayakunamiyit, é-pustastutindyit. dsay 
mina ch-kituhtayit, pdtsimdyiwa mustuswah. min dyakuni pimwdyiwa, ah- 
. nipahdytt. 

“ ha, nisim, tanihkih pdyak pikuh kah-nipahat 2” staw. 

“ ha, akuyikuhk ka-kispundnaw paéyak uldyaniy,” itéw. 

_ dkusi tahkupitamiyiwah mina dma utastutiniyiw. dékwa wiya ntawih- 
utinam utéyiniy. dkus d-kih-mitsisutsik, piyisk mina tipiskdyiw. tytkuh 
‘mina éh-nipdyit, dsay mina kimutiw, dsay mina ch-tapasit. mitun adkwah 
wih-kakwé-mihkawikiw. wihyaw min éh-ayat, Gsay mina dé-wih-wapaniyik, 
adsay mina sdskisiw. nisu mistikwah adh-niswaskisuyit, dkutah tas atone 
nahapiw, Gh-asitahpitisut, “namuya dkwah ékuté pihtsdyithk nka-nipan 
be dkus tsi nipdw. kitahtawih ch-mékwd-nipat, ha-kushuskunt- 

us 
“ nistésd, waniskdh ! kikipiskawin. niwih-ponan.” 
ds ama itah k-bh-wayawthk, iskwahtimihk dkutah as 6ma k-asitahpisut. 
“ yaho, nisin, kikt-wthtamdatin éh-kiskwéhkwasiskiyan. nama tsiy awa 
kitastutin dwaku, ‘ nik-dyawik !’ céh-itéyimit kitastutin ?”’ itéw. 


mina ah-tipishayik, dsay mina dh-nipdyit, utinam; é&h-wiwahut, mina 
Gh-tapasit, Gh-sbhkih Gh-tapasit. iyikuh mina éy-wih-wapank, dsay mina 
wih-nipadw. kihtsihkusiw ispimihk. dkutah ékwah mipaw, mina Gh-asiiah- 
pisut. . 


” 


1The animate form awah: “this” is a slip of speech or record, since the following 
verb has inanimate form of object. , , 


55 


aspin G-nipat, kitahtawé mistik uhtst kd-kuskuskuyahkahukut, “ wan- 
iskah, nistésd ! ka-kaskapasun ! niwin-pénén,” ch-itikut, wikiyihk ispimih 
Gh-akusit, ttah k-th-wayawiyapahtayik dkutah. 

“yahd, nisim, dkuyikuhk dkus 6ma dsih-kiskwihkwasiskiyan !” ttéw, 
ah-pah-nihtakustt, Gh-pihtukdt, dh-ta-tahkupitahk, itah kah-kth-tahkupit- 
aytk. ; 

émis iik: “ wisahkdtsahk, namuya ka-kth-kimutamawin nitastutin. 
ayak 6ma’ naépayanth ah-pd-kiwahtahikuyan. nawats ta-pénihtayan !” 
itik. : 
dkus G-kth-mitsisut, sipwaéhtdw. 
dkuyikuhk dskwak dtayohkaéwin. 

‘ _ Once upon a time, as Wisahketchahk was walking along, he saw a 
tipi. 

When he reached it, he said, “Hum, hum!” 

As usual, he was hungry. 

“Yes, yes, come in!’’ someone called to him. 

When he entered, there was a lone man. When he sat down, he looked 
all round for something to eat. He saw nothing. So there he sat. 

Presently the other said, “Oh dear, but I am forgetting that my eer 
brother is hungry!” he said. ~~ - 

He saw that something or other was tied fast in the doorway. The 
other took that thing and removed the covering: it turned out to be a 
headgear, a headgear of weasel-skin, and a little flute. The man scattered 
some.embers of the fire and burned incense for the headgear and the flute. 
He watched the man do it. The man put on the headgear, opened the 
door-flap, and took one of his arrows. When he blew on the flute, quickly 
a buffalo came running, and ran right past the doorway. The man shot it 
and killed it. He took off the headgear, put it back in its covering, and 
tied it fast to the wood of the tent-poles. 7 

“Now, big brother, go cut out the tongue; only that!” he told him, 

So he took it, and went and cut out the tongue. ~ 

“Tt looks as if we should not get our fill!” he thought. 

Then he prepared the roast. ; ; 

He went out of the tent, thinking, “I shall take a lot of the meat.” 

The buffalo was not there; it had gone away. He went back in, and 
they ate. 

Little brother, do you always kill game in this manner?” he asked 
him. . . 24 - 

“Yes. I never tramp about when I want to kill game. I put on this 
head-dress, when I want to kill game, and by blowing the flute, summon 
buffalos,” said the man. , 

“You don’t say!’ he answered him. 

Wisahketchahk thought thus: “I shall steal it from him!” he thought; 
“T shall tell him stories to make him sleepy, so that he will not know when 
I steal it from him,’’ he thought. . 

Then, when night came, he told him tales, so as to make him get sleepy. 
When he knew that the other was sleepy, then they went to bed. He 
kept from going to sleep. As s00n as the other slept, he took the headgear, 
and went out of the tent with it, stealing it and carrying it over his shoulder. 


56 


In this way he fied. He ran on and on, making all kinds of turns and 
twists, with the thought, “So that he may not track me.’’ Then, towards 
dawn in a hollow place he lay down. 

“Tf I walk on in daytime, he will see me, in case he comes here. pur- 
suing me,” he thought; ‘When night comes, I shall continue in my flight,” 
he thought, as he lay down. . 

As,soon as he lay down, he fell asleep, lying all doubled up, with the 
headgear still on his shoulders, 

Suddenly, in the midst of his sleep, someone shook him and roused 
him, saying to him, “Big brother, get up! You are blocking my way. I 
want to build the fire.”’ 

There he was, inside the other’s tipi; he had been sleeping right whére 
the other always built the fire. He arose. 

“Dear me, little brother, I am afflicted with sleep-walking like thist 
And here it seems I have taken your sacred bundle!” he told him, rémov- ae 
ing his burden and tying it back in its place. Sane 

‘All the more surely, I will steal it,” he thought. vr 

That night again he told him stories to make him sleepy. As soon a8, 
the other went to sleep, again he took it, slung it over his shouldef; and 
made off. All night long he ran. When he thought, “Surely, I am far off,” 
towards dawn, where a tree stood, in a wooded place, “Here I shall sleep, ” 

- he thought. So he sat down, leaning against the tree. Like this he tore his 
jacket and tied himself fast to the tree. ‘In this position he went to sleep. 
Hardly had he gone off to sleep, when suddenly the other shook him awake. 

“Big brother, get up! You are delaying me; my headgear! I want 
to try and kill some game!” the other was saying to him. 

When he opened his eyes, what was this? He was sitting inside the 
place, tied fast to a tent-pole. , 

He said, “Dear me! This is the way I am afflicted with the habit of . 
walking in my sleep; and it seems that in some way I have taken up your 
sacred bundle, little 'prother!” he said to him, and rose to his feet, and tied 
the thing back where it belonged. 

The other at once took it, shook it out, and put on the headgear. 
Again, when he blew the flute, he called a buffalo, This one, too, he shot. 
, and killed. 

‘Now, little brother, why do you kill only one?” he asked him. ~~ 
“Oh; one tongue is quite enough to give us our fill,” he told-him. - 
With this he again tied up that headgear of his. And Wisabketchahk 
went and took up the tongue. When thus they had eaten, finally night 
came again. Again, as soon as the other slept, he stole it, and again made 
off in fight.. He was bound to run fast, now, and far. When again he had 
‘gone a great distance, and again dawn wag hear, again he went into the 
brush. Where two trees stood side by side, there he sat down between 
them, and tied himself fast, thinking ‘This time I shall not be sleeping 
inside there!” So be went to sleep. Suddenly, in the midst of his sleep, 
there was the other, shaking him awake. 

“Big brother, get up! You are blocking my way. I want to put wood 

on the fire,’ 

It appeared that in the place where one went out of the tent, right in 

the doorway it appeared that he was tied fast. 


Ney 
57 oN 
4 


“Dear me, little brother, I told you I was given to walking in my /- 
sleep. Are you sure that this headgear of yours has not been thinki 
* “Let him possess me!’ meaning me?” he asked him. 

The next night, as soon as the other slept,-again he took the thin , 
slung the bundle across his shoulder, and again made off, fleeing with aly an 
his might. When dawn again was near, again he meant to sleep. He ™. 
climbed high up on a tree. There he went to sleep, after again tying him- 
self fast. : 

He had gone off to sleep, when suddenly the other was prodding him 
awake with a atick, saying to him, “Get up, big brother! You will be 
strangled by smoke! I am going to put wood on the fire,” and there he was, 
perched on top of the other’s dwelling, right at the place where the smoke 
comes out of the tipi. oy ; 

“Dear me, little brother, just see how terribly I am afflicted with 
sleep-walking!”’ he said to him, as he climbed down and came into the 
tent and tied the thing back into the place where it had been tied fast. 

' The other answered him thus: “Wisahketchahk, you will not be able 
to steal my headgear from me. It was this headgear itself which brought 
you back here whenever you went to sleep. You might as well give it up!” 
the other. told him. _ 

At this, as soon as he had eaten, he went away. ; 

That is the end of the sacred story. 


* 
wa 


. (11) The Bear-Woman 
Coming-Day 


4 - 
ké-kisikaw-pihtukdw. 
‘kitdhtawdé = padyak ayisiyiniw iwahk ah-wa-wikit, ch-payakut, nama 
wihkdts wipamdw ayisiyiniwoh, wiya pikéh dkuiah dh-aydt. kah-nipatsth 
ké-tipiskayik, wiydpaniyiki matsiw. wiydpamdtsi mustuswah, nipahdw. <q 
payak utdéyiniy utinam, dkwah péyak updéminak, &h-kiwit, d-takuhiat wikihk, 
dkwah manah dh-kisitdput, kah-mitsisutsi, dkwah d-nikuhidt. akust dkwah 
piyisk tipiskdyiw mana. dkwa dy-ay-apit, piyisk kaskdythtam dh-pdyaku, . 
Gh-wapaniyik, min ah-mdisit, minah pdyak nipahdw mustuswah. kiwdw ; 
apsis utinam ké-mitsit. aa _. 
° tstk Gy-thiat wikihk, kd-wdpahtak mistah dh-astayikih mihtah wikihk. 
ay-itdyihiam ; “ awiyak d-kh-takuhtdt,”' dkus itdythtam. — miywdyrhtam. ; 
Gh-pihtukaét, nam dwiyah wapamaw, dsah: kaih-wahpahtakahikaythk. mike} 
tatam akah GhAvipamat awiyah. ay-apiw. “tdndhk 6mah aka k-dh-apit ~~ 
awiyak ?” <itéyihtom. potih itah k-apit maskisinahmiskam. mistahi L 
miywéythtam, “ iskwéw magkots ka-kih-takuhtat,”’ dh-tdythtahk ; “ kiksdpa ~ 
nika-matsin ; nika-kakwéh-késiskawiw, minah takuhtdtsch, " ahatéythtahk. 
; ah-wipaniyik, kiyipah sipwahtaw, dh-matsit. minah nipahaw péyak 
musiuswah. uldyiniy: utinam ékwoh uspikékanah. Gkwah utihithkusiwah 
Gkwah upiminak. dkus isi kiwiw, “ nika-kdsiskawaw,” d<itéyihtah. pah- 
pimipahtaw. “, el. 
istk dy-ihtat wikihk, wapahtam dh-pikihtsdstyik, minah mistaht mistah 
Gh-astdyikih. dh-pihtukdt, iyayaw nanitawdpiw : nam dwiyah wapamdw. 


i Short, simple speeches are often conjunct. ee 


58 y 
mistaht mihtatam Gké h-apiyit awiyah. .dkwah d-paminawasut, kitahtawd 
ka-miskahk maskisinah. utinam, éh-wd-wapahtiahk, dh-miywasiniytkih. 

“ maskats iskwéw kd-tah-takusthk, ” itdyihtam ; “hah, uhtsitaw nika- 

kakwéh-késiskawdw. ktkisdpa nika-stpwéhtén,’' dkust itdythtam. °. 

tdpwah d-kih-mitsisut kawisiméw dh-nipat. kiksdpd waniskaw ; namuya 

milsisow, d-sipwahtat, d-madtsit. potih kiyepah nipahdw mustuswah. dkwah 
é-kih-wiyinihat, uspikdkanah utihtihkusiwah utinam, dh-ati-kiwdt. pdh- 
pimipahtaw. tsik Gy-thtat wikihk, kd-wapahtahk mistah a-pikihtdyik wikth. 
mistaht miywdythtam, “ maskéts apiw, ” d-tdyihtah. 
Gh-takuhtat,- d-pihtukdt, awin odhih kih-apiyiwah mistahi dh-miyusiyii 
iskwdwah ohtapiwinihk. ékutah nahapiw, d-wih-padhpihikut, d-kitipamat. 
sdsay dsah kdh-paminawasoyit. sdmak utinamiyiwah umaskisinah, 4- 
kétaskisindnikut, kutakah d-wih~pustaskisinahikut, dkwah d-kasitsihtsénikut, 
Gh-kasthkwanikut. Gkusi dkwah asamik; Gkwah miisisuwak, a, mistahi 
miywaythiam. 
amis itdw aw iskwéw: “ tanikhih apisis kd-pdlayin wiyds ?” 
ah,” itwéw awa ndpdw, ‘nam adwiyak ntihtatdyimaw ; dyak ohist 
apisis k-oh~patay yan,” dkust itwdw awa napaw ; “ “tantah mak omah dy- 
uhtuhtdyin ?” ttwéw awa napdw. 

“ wahyaw otah ch-wikiyahk,”’ ttwdéw aw iskwdw'; “ kiyam, miyatsryinth 
mistaht pdtah.wiydsah ; nohidhkatéwak, ” ttwdw aw iskwdw, “ nohtdwiy, ” 
itwaw. . 

“ cha’ ,” ttwdw awa napdw. 

- ékutah ‘uhtsi tahtu-kisikdw mdtstw. piyisk mistahi mpahdw mustuswah, 
awa iskwéw mistah dtuskdw, wiydsah dy-usthtat. 

mistah éh-aydtsik, ‘ nawats itubtéyahk nohtiwiy, ” itwéw awa iskwdw ; 
“ mistaht nohiahkatéwak, ” 

“6 cha’ , ” atwdw awa népdiw. 

“os a dain ttwdw aw iskwdw. 

“ kakway kdy-dpatsihtayahk ta-pimiwitayahk hakway ar” 

“ Gh, tit-dhtakun dtuké tanist t-dsi-pihkuhuyahk, ” itwdw aw iskwéw. 

tapwd kiksépad-_dh-mitsisutsik, “ nikanuhtéhkan,” itdw uwikimakanah ; 

“ itp. mistikwah ka-isimatan, dkutah ta-kapdsiyahk ; ; Gkutah uhtsi ka- 
“matsin,” itdw aw iskwiw unapdémah, 
tdpwd d-kisi-mitsisuistk sipwéhtéiw awa ndpdw.  dkwah aw iskwéw 
wawayiw, 6ht utsayanisiwawah unimawiniwiwah nah-ndway dh-astat. ékwah 
d-kisi-wawdyit aw iskwéw atih-tah-tahtsi-tahkuskdw unimawiniwawah ; dkusi 
Gh-ati-sipwihtat, nama kikway ihtakuniyiwah show unimawiniwawa. adkus. 
is Gh-pah-pimuhidt. itéh Gh-utakusiniyik kdé-miskahk mistikwah dh-tsimatd- 
yikth, dkutah kapdésiw. dkwah d-tahkiskatsikdt aw iskwdw, wikiwadw dkutah 
_ astdyrw. dkwah utinam, dh-mdnukdt. dh-kisi-maénukdt, pthisayihk dsay 
mina tahkiskdisikédw ; kahkiyaw dkutd pahkihtiniyiwa uisaydnisiwawah 
 unimawinmwawa. dkust dkwah pihtukdw aw iskwéw, dh-paminawasut. 
poh ch-ati-kiwat awa napdw, kd-wdpahtahk wikiwaw, “ tanisi tiyd- 
tahk ?” dy-itéyimat uwikimakanah. dh-pihtukdt, ka-wih-pahpihikut uwiki- 
makanah. dGh-itépit, kahkiyaw wapahiam uisaydnisiwdwa unimawiniwawa. 
mistahi mamaskdtam Gh-totamiytt 

Omis itwéw awa aw iskwaw: “ wapahkih ka-takuhténdnaw itah noht- 
awiy k-Gydtstk. mistahi nohtahkatdwak,” itwéw awa iskwéw. 


, 


~ 


59 


Pa 

tapwah dh-wapahk, kiksdépad waniskawak. d-kih-miteisutsik, wawdyiwak- 

“ witsiwohkamawin,'” itwdw aw iskwdw; “‘tdnisth dh-tétahk ?’ 
k-dtdyihtaman, ka-kiskdyihtdn tansih dh-totamdn,”’ itwdw away iskwdw. 

“haha ,” itwéw awa nipdw. 

tdpwd wawdyiwak, nih-ndway Gh-astdtsik utsaydnisiwawa unimawini- 
wawa. Gah-kitapamat uwikimdkanah, dh-atih-sipwdhidyit, dh-tah-tdhtsi- 
tahkuskdyit unimadwiniwawah, nama kékway wapahtam awa ndpéw. 

dkus isi pimuhtétstk,-mistaht madmaskdtiw uwikimdkanah, dh-totamiyit. 
dkus ist d-pa-pimuhidtstk, kitahtawd, dh-at-dlakusiniyik, ka-wapahtahkik 
Gh-pikihtdyik itah-dh-pasahtsdyik, d-sakdyik ; dkutah d-sdkdwdtsik, ka-pd- 
matawistyit usimisah aw iskwdw. . 

dmisi itwdyiwah : “ dydyi, misi-pdtdw nimadwinah nimis |” itwdyiwah. 

dkus dti-takuhtéwok wikiythk. 

awa kiséyiniw, hay hay hay |" matwd-itwiw. 

d-~yohtinahk aw iskwaw, ch-pihtukd-tah-tahkiskatsikdt, pihtsdythk pah- 
kihtintyiwah unimdwiniwdwa utsaydnisiwdwa. dkust awah nétukdsiw 
ah-at-dtinahk, mistaht miywdythtam, “ dkwah kd-mitsisuydn, ” dh-itdythtah. 

> nandskuméw awa kisdyimiw. dkust pihtukdwak. 

Omis itwéw awa kisdyintw : “ dkusi d-kih-itdyihtamdn, ntdnis, ‘ ituhtd!? 
ka-kih-ititin, ‘ dh-pa-pdyakut ninahdhkisim,’” itwéw awa kisdyiniw. 

dkutah ay-ayaw dkwah. patth kinwésk d-kih-ayat dkutah, dkwah d- 
miyuskamiyik, kd-kiskéyihtahk wakayosah ka-wiwit 6h iskwdwah k-dtdyih- 
tahk, bhi minah kisdyiniwah notukdsiwah wakaydsah ds Ohi. dkwah mth- 
latam dké tahkih ta-kih-witsdwat. . 

. Gkust dkuyikuhk dwaké dtayohkdwin. 


¥ 


Once upon a time a man lived all alone and never saw any people, 
being all alone in that place. When he had slept at night, in the morning 
he went hunting. Whenever he gaw buffalo, he killed them. He. would 
take a tongue and 4 thigh-bone and go home, and when he reached his 
dwelling, he would prepare his meal, and when he had eaten, he would 
gather firewood. So night would come upon him. As he stayed thus by 
himself, at last he felt lonesome. When daylight came and he as usual 
went hunting, again he killed a buffalo. He went home; he took a little 
to eat. vay ie a, 
When he was near his dwelling-place, he saw a great: pile of: firewood 
by his tent. He wondered about it; “It must be that someone has come,” 
he thought. He was glad. When he entered, he saw nobody, though it 
was plain that someone had swept the place. He was sorry that he saw 
noone. Hestayed there. “How is it that there is no one here?” he thought. 
Lo, there where he sat, he found some moccasins, He was very glad, 
thinking, ‘A woman perhaps is the one who came here. In the morning 1 


shall hunt; I shall try to comé upon her while she is here, if she comes 


again,” he thought. " 

At daybreak he quickly went off to hunt. Again he killed a buffalo. 
.He took the tongue, the ribs, the kidneys, and a thigh-bone. Then he 
went home, thinking, “I shall come in time to find her there.”’? He kept 
running. oo? 


1Error or real variant?°The usual form would be wttsdhkamawin. 


—) 


OA 


60 

When he got near his dwelling, he saw a little smoke, and a great 
pile of firewood. When he entered, eagerly he looked abou}: he saw no 
one. He'was very sorry that no one was there. Then, as he went about 
his cooking, soon he found some moccasins. He picked them up and. 
examined them; they were very pretty. rr’ . _ 

“Probably it is a woman has been coming here,” he’thought; ‘Now. 
all the harder I shall-try to find her here. Early in the morning I shall 


_ go,” he thought. 


After eating he Jay down to sleep. He got up early; without odie 
he went forth to hunt. In a short time he killed a buffalo, and when he 
had cut it up, took the ribs and the kidneys and went home. He ran as” 
he went. When he was close to his dwelling, he saw much smoke rising 
from his tent. He was very glad, thinking, ‘Perhaps she is there.’? 

When he got there and entered, lo and behold, there sata very hand- 
some woman on his settee... He sat down there, and She smiled at him as 
he looked at her. It appeared that she had already done the cooking. 
Without delay she took off his moccasins and put others on his feet, and - 
she washed his hands and face. Thereupon she gave him to eat, and they 
took their meal. Oh, he was very glad. . a 

Thus spoke that woman: .‘‘Why do you bring so little meat?” 


he 


“Oh,” said the man, “I did not think anyone was here; that is why = 


I brought only a little,” he said; ‘But whence do you come?” he asked. 
“A long ways from here we dwell,” she answered. “Please, when you. 
hunt, bring-much meat; they are in want of food,” she said, “my father ~ 


_ and his people.” 


“Very well,” said he. , 

So he hunted every day. In time he killed many buffalo. The woman 
worked a great deal, preparing thé food. ; " 

When they bad a large amount of it, “Suppose we go to my father’s 
place,” said the woman; “They.are very hungry.” 

“Very well,” said the man. 

“Tomorrow,’" she said. 

“But what are we to use to carry things?” 

“Oh, there will be some*way we:can manage,” she answered. 

Then, when they ate in the morning, “Go on ahead,” she.told her 
husband; “Then you will set up some sticks at the place where we are to . = 
camp; from that place you will go hunting,” she said to her husband. 


So, when they had eaten, the man set out. And the woman made 
ready, laying their belongings and their food supply in a row. Then, when 
she had got ready, she went along, stepping each time upon their bundles 
of food; and when in this wise-she:set out, not a trace was there of their 
supplies of food. So then she walked on. Toward nightfall she found the 
sticks that were set up in the ground; there she made camp. When she 
kicked the ground, there lay their tent. Then she took the tent and set 


‘it up. When she had set it up, inside again-she stamped the ground; on 


that spot fell all their belongings and their supplies of food. Then she went 
inside and cooked their meal. a 


There, when the man came back and saw their dwelling; “How did 


‘ 
- 4 


_she do it?!’ he thought concerning his wife. . When he ‘éntered, there she 


was, smiling at him. He looked about and saw all their ‘belongings and 


‘ their supplies of food. He wondered greatly at what she had’ done. 


comet 
oy 
a 


Ne 


» 


o 
_ 61 ) 
Thus spoke she: “Tomorrow we ‘shall come to where my- father’s 
people stay. They are in great want of food,” she said. 
So when day: broke, early they arose. When they hadseaten, they 
made ready. -. . . : 
“Help me,’’ said the woman; “Since you have been thinking, ‘How 
does she do it?’ you shall now know how I do,” she said. ~ _ 
“Yes,” answered the man. ° a 
Accordingly they made ready by Idying in.a row their possessions and 
their stored meats. When he watched ‘his wife, as she went forth, find 
stepped on one after another of their bundles, he saw. nothing at all t ere. 
So asthey walked on, he marvelled greatly at what his wife had done. 
Then, as they walked on, towards evening they saw smoke rising from a 
wooded ravine; when they came in sight of that place, the woman’s 
younger sister came forth, ~, ~~ we os 
She cried: “Splendid! My. elder sister is bringing a great store of 
meat!’ .* ~ i ° 
86 they went on and came to the house. OO 
_. The old man called out, “Splendid!” ¢ 
= When’ the woman .opened the door and, as she entered, stamped 


_ repeatedly, then intethe lodge fell their stored meats and their belongings. 


Then.-when the old woman went on to pick them up, she greatly rejoiced, 
thinking, “So now I shall eat.” The old man gave‘thanks: ‘Thus ¥ had 
it in ‘mind, daughter, when ‘Go there,’ I said to 7. ‘where my son-jn-law 


* dwells alone’, ” said the old man. 


There hé stayed then. When he had-beeh there a long time, and 


_ spring had come, then he knew that she, the whman, as it seemed to him, 


” whom he had to, wife, was a bear, and that aJso the old man and the old 


woman were bears. And he was sorry that he could not always be with 
| 


them. ; | 
That ig the end of this sacred story. . 
Ve: cos . ~ 


(12) The Bearsark Woman 


; s Louis Moosomin - 
nih-namiskwékapaw. e 
. “Kitahtawdé péiyak napdw wiya piku éh-piyakukamikisit pisisik mana. 
Kitohtawd namuya wihkdts apiyiwa uwikimdkana, tahtu-kisikdw ah-sipwah- 
“‘téyit, kaGh-wawésthuyitsih, ayowinisa Gh-miywasiniyikih tahtu-kisikaw Gh- 


_ pusiskahk awa iskwdw. kispin piyd-kiwdtsth, mistahi mdna mdydtaniyiwa, 


kunta mina misiwé d-asiskiwiytkth, Ce 

> “tnahki dtukd?” itéythtam awa napéw; “ mahtih nika-kakwd- 

wapamaw,”’ idyihtam. me 
tapwd matsihkiséw. dkwah kiméts pih-wih-wiskawahtaw wikiwéw, 


_ mahtih d-wih-kiskinawapamat uwikimakanah, tantéh isi kitah-sipwéhtayrt. 


' awaw itah Gh-owatit,”’ itwiw awa nipdw, dh-kiwit.'~ 


kd-wapamat aspin utah sakahk dy-isi-sipwahlaytt, kiskdyimdéw itéh ch- 
ituhtéyit.  kd-wadpamdt dkuté sakahk wakayosah d-wah-uwiisimusryit, 
mistahi kisiwdsiw, dh-uwhtiyimal ohi wakayosah. * .. 
“ wapahkih nika-nipahdw 1” idyihtam. _ 
tapwi ch-utakusiniyik, dmist ty awa: “anuhts wakayés nimisk- 
aaiee—5 ; 5 


fo . 


am 


Gkwah dmisih itwdw anah ishwdio ; Omisih dsah hih-itik ohih witsimusah 
wakaydseah: “ kispin nipahtkawiydmi, utindhkan nipahkékin,” kth-ttik 


_ dea; ' ékust itap ntawdyihtamani pikw ispihk ayisiyiniwak ‘mchtsdt kika- 


nipakadwak,” kth-ititk dsa awa iskwéw; dkusi omisih itéw .undpima: 
“dkaya misiwé qhkuswéhkan. tdgskote atdwadkan kéy-isi-pdhkuniht, 
dkusth isthéhkan,” kih-ttiw dsa undpdma, , 

‘tha ,” itwiw awa népdw, d-sihkimikut wiwa. - 

lanwé wihpi-pahkundw Ghi, ispihk dh-ntawi-nipahdt shi waékayosa. 

omist itudw an iskwéw: “ namuya katsdts ta~mowdyahk'!” 

“tkama méka awiyat kéh-kth-muwat ch-uwitsimusiyit 1 itéw uwikim- 
dkanah, | . 

dkusi tipwi Kkisihdw shi wakaydsiwayanah. dkwah utsawdsimisiw 
awa iskwiw, nisu ndpdsisah ayawdw sémék, nisdtéwa. dyakuni wakaydsah 


"dah uuitosimd. tapwd apihtaw wiyawéhk misiwé Spiwdwak asa oki naépés- 


~~ Epitatsth. 


_ mitun dea 


isak. dkust dyiwihk kitimadkdyiméw awa naépdéw; dyiwihk -wt-kakwéh- 
uhmkihéw, dla namuya wiya utawdsimisah. tépwd uhpikiwak oki awdsisak. 

dkwah th-ati-misikititsik, kitahtawd Omisih itéw: “ dkdya wihkats 
tipwéhtamuk, nitawasimisitik, ahki kiyawaw ‘‘ wqGkayosak’ itikawiydku. 
kiyawaw tapwi dkttowahk. dkusi itikawiyéku kispin, ka-kwiskimund- 
waw. ” a , 

Gkusi ipwi nama wihkdlts dsa/tdpwihtamwak oki awdsisak, dkusi 
ditihtuawt. 

Kitahtawé awa usimimas, 
ustdsah, : . 
lapwd wikayésiuiwak. /pdé-notsihiwak awdsisah, éh-pdé-pd-paskatay- 


sé 


iyadm wakayosiuitan mahtth { ” itéw oht 


Gkuah kisiwak pikpbahk ka-pih-nipahihtyawi! oki maskusisak, sémdk 
aud tskwiw kisiwdsiy! dsah. undpdma kihkdméw ; wayawi-kwdaskuhtiw ; 
nitaw-oliniw bhi ké-kiy-asihat uskutékayah, Ghi maskwaydna. dkus isi 
atisi-kwiskiméw./ phtuké-kudskuhtiw kéhtsiwak . wikiwahk ; undpéma 
ati-nipahdw. Akulah uhisi mituni kehkiyaw aytsiyiniwah mdatsihéw. 
ih-mihtsitihk, dwakunt kahkiyaw mituni nipahéw. skadwiya 
piku iskuhjiv. dtah éh-pd-paskisuht, namuya és { kth-sakotsihaw ; namuya 


~kinipakaw, piyisk Gkus isi kahkiyaw ayyéiyiniwah ka-kisi-méstsihdt. - 
Gkwoh ava uskirikiw kiwuliw, éwaku awa uptisa ké-wakaydsiwiyit. adkwah 


awa iskudw. bhtawiya iskuhéw, htsitaw é-ih-kakwatakihat. tapwd pdéyak 
mistahi kwatakiyéw uk@wiya, mina usimisa péyak, dwakuni piku éh-iskuhdt. . 
Gkwah mana pikw id d-papdmatsihut/piyd-takuhiatsi piku naydstaw dh- 
kihkaémat, nandtuhk dy-isi-kwdtakihgt, kiyikaw G-saskahwdt, misiwé dsa 
umikiwak oki kéht-dyak mina aw iskwésis. mistahi dsah kitimahdw. kitah- 
tawdé awa uskinikiw kd-takuhtét, Vtanéhki uma ?” itéyihtam, itah dma ka- 
kih-mihtsditiyit ayisiyiniwa kahkiyay Gh-méstsihimiht. pdyak piku-miki- 
uahp udpahtam, uhpimdé ahAsimatéyik.; dkwah kitahtawé usimisah ké-. 
wapamidl, éh-ntawi-lapakwdyit, wapuswah d-wih-kakwd-nipahdyitt. ° 

“ tanéhk oma k-th-ispayik, nisimia ?” itéw. : 

Omis itwiw awa igkwisis: “ é-kih-méstsihtat kimisinaw. kahkiyaw 
ayisiyiniwah kih-mdsfsthiw. naydstaw pikuh kohtawiyinaw pimdatisiw,” 
ttudw aw iskwdsia.. ‘ 

mistahi palkw. 


tam awa naipdw. - 


1 Why iterative? 


f 


“ dkwah mistahi namuya G-sakotsihiht, Gtah &h-paskisuht, ” titwaw awa 
iskwdsis. ao 

dkust ékiva, “ tanist ké-kih-totaman ?” itaythtam awa napaw. 

* pikw disik ana kita-kakwitsimayék tantowihk. unipiwin Gh-astéyik, 
kakwaisimahkak ; mahtth, ‘ kéhtsinah awiyak d-sthkimikuydék [’ dta wiya 
kik-dtikuwaw. amuya | usdm mistaht Gh-manitowiyin, Gka@ éh-kih-nipa- 
hikawiyin,’ kik-dtawaw.”’ . 

tapwd kiwdw awe ‘shwsis, nisu jwdpuswa, nipahtamak ohi ustésah. 

mis ttwéw: “ néhiah,” itéw, “ nistés niwapamdw,” itdw ohtdwiya, 

“dwakunt 6ht d-nipahtamawit. 't kakwatsimahkak tantowihk ch-uhisi- 
mipit,’ itwéw ana. 

ah, tapwé awa mayaw. bhi ch-takuhtéyit, mituni misiwd dsah ‘dhemis- 
wakaniwit awa iskwéw. dkwah tépwa kakwétsiméwak. 

“ tinahki k-6-nohtd-kiskdyihtamadk ? nama tsi ahpoh kikusistwaw ka- 
kah-kiwutét niwth-kakwd-nipahik ?” ttwéw dsa awa iskwéw. 

“hd, namuya, nidnis | ‘maskéts mistaht manitéwiw,’ déh-itdyimitan, 
k-6-nohlé-kiskdythtaman tanimatowihk t-6nipowiniyan. ”’ 

“ha, nohtah, ata nikiskéyihtin Gh-wth-kakwé-nipahikawiyan, k-6h- 
kakwatsimiyan - L” itwéw awa iskwaw ; “ nisttihk tawaythk. ” 

‘akwah tapwd mayaw d-sipwahtdyit awa, simak ituhtéw awa uskinikiw, 

“ hwa, ‘ nitawisitanihk nonipswinin ; dwak uhtsi ak awiyak k-6-kth- 
nipahit,’ itwaw asa. 

dkwah émis ttwaéw awa uskintkiw : “mistikwa ka-kin aleihkwatamub? 
dkusi misiw itah ka-tsch-tsimatandwiw. dkusi dkutah kita-kisisin anima. 
dkusi dkutah kd-nipahayahk, ’’ itwéw désah awa uskinikiw. 

mayaw d-sipwéhtéyit, misiwd tsimatawak mistsikusah. 

- tipwé d-takuhtdyit, “ mahtih asamik |” Gh-itikutstk, simak mdtsih- 
kithkaméwak. . ; 

“kéhtsindh awtyak dhusi G-kih-itikuydk, k-Gh-kah-kihkadmiyak 1” 


- _ uwew awa iskwdéw. 


“a 


“Gha’ ; otah kih-takuhtaw nistas,” itwdw awa iskwésis. 
iskutéw dsah uhtsi pakamahwéw bhi umisah, tdpwd pikuh dkus ist 
wayawiyamiwak. dkust dkwah aw iskwaéw utthtindw ohi uskutdkayah, oki 
mana k-6tindt wah-nipahtakdtsth maskwayanah. mayaw Gh-atih-pimi- 
payit awa iskwiw, maka mina éh-kwéskimut, sémak utdwisitanihk kisisin. 
pahkisin dkutah. akutah dsah kih-nipahaw éwakuh iskwéw, mihisat ayisiyin- 
twah a-kih-nipahat. 


oa 


Once.upon a time a certain man always dwelt off alone with his family. 
After a while hig wife never stayed at home, but went off every day, after 
putting on her fine-¢lothes; «9% yeey day that woman put on her good clothes. 
When she came-back homed! Key were always in a bad state, niuddied ‘all 
over. 


~¥The lr formation from nipiw: “he dies’ would be nipiwin: “death” (ct. 
unipiwin : death” earlier in this text) and unipiwiniw: “he his death.” But 
the form here in the text is probably. recorded right: nipéwin : “death” and unipowiniw : 
“he has his, death are probably relics of the time when “to die’’ was an regular verb, _, 
ef. Vox nepwa, Menomini nepuah: “he dies," Fox nepowent;: “death” =. 

Normal form probably, ha-kenikesheutamul ; 


831865} 


‘s 64 


“J wonder what this means?” thought the man; “Suppose I watch 
her ,” he thought. 

"So he pretended to go hunting. Then he gradually stole up to the 
lodge, to watch his wife and learn which way she would go. When he had 
seen her go off into the woods, he knew where she was going......: 

“Tomorrow I shall kill him!” he thought. 

So then in the evening he said, “Today I found a bear's den,” said 
the’man, when he came home. 

Then the woman spoke thus; for thus she had been told by her lover, 
the bear: “If I am slain, do you then take my hide,” he must have told 
her; ‘In this way, later, should you so desire, you may at any time kill. 
many people,” he must have told that woman; so now she said to her 
husband, ‘Do not cut him up. -Just as one skins a fur-bearing animal for 
sale, do you so prepare him,’ she told her husband. 

“Very well,” said the man, in answer to his wife’s request. 

So he cut the creature out of its hide, when he went to kill that bear. 

The woman said, ‘“We do not have to eat him, do we?” 

rn ” replied the husband. 
: Then accordingly she prepared that bearskin. Then that woman gave 
birth. Even then and no later, she had two boys, twins. ....... 
And those boys were covered with fur all over half of their bodies. Then 


‘ that man to some extent took pity on them; he decided to bring them up . 


as. best he could, even though they were not his, And so those children 
grew up. 

Then, as they were growing ‘Up, atone time he told-them, “Never 
give credence to it, my children, if ever you are called ‘bears.’ Such, 
indeed, you are. If ‘that is said to you, you will change your. bodily form.” 

Accordingly, those boys never gave heed when they were called that 
way. 

Then at one time, ‘‘Let us turn into bears!” the younger one said to 
the elder. 

So they turned into bears. ars. came pursuing the children, and 
when they reached them, tore them open 2¢ the belly. 

Then when, close to the lodge those bear-cubs were killed, at once- 

‘that woman grew angry. She upbraided her husband; she sprang out of 
the lodge; she went and took-that mystic dress she had made, that bear- 
skin robe. At once she thus changed her bodily form. She came bounding 
right into the lodge; she killed her husband. Then'she killed off all the 
people. Although there were many of them, she killed them all. Only her 
mother she spared. ‘Althoygh she was shot at again and again, she could 
not be overcome; it was ighpossible to-kill her, so that at last she thus had 
exterminated those people. Then that young man went visiting, whose 
elder sister was the woman who had turned into a bear. And that woman 
had sparéd her father’ only so as to torture him. -Truly, she greatly tor- . 
mented her mother And her little sister, having spared only them. .When 
she had been going about here and there, when she came back, she would 
do nothing but scold them, and torment them in various ways, burning 
them pell-mellso that those old people and that little girl were all covered 
with scars. She kept them in a grievous state. Presently, when ‘that 
young man arrived, “What can be the matter?” he thought, since all the 
‘many people there had been killed. He saw only one tipi, standing off to 
one side. Then presently he saw his little sister going out to snare rabbits. 


65 


“How has this happened, little sister?” he asked her. . 


Said the girl, “Because our sister has killed all in the place. She has 
exterminated the people. Only our father is alive,” said the girl. 


The man was deeply shocked. 

“And she has not been overcome, even by shooting,” said the girl. 

Then, “What shall I be able to do?” thought the man. 

“Tt seems that the only way is for you to ask her where is her mortal 
spot. Ask her. ‘Surely someone has put you up to this!’ she will say to 
you. ‘No! It is only that you are so greatly endowed with supernatural 
power, that you cannot be killed,’ you’ will say to her.” 


bh Accordingly the girl went home. Her brother killed two rabbits for 

er. 

; She spoke thus: “Father,” she said to her father, “I have seen my 
brother; he it was killed these for me. ‘Ask her in what spot a wound 

would cause her death,’ he says.” ‘ 


Then truly, as soon as that other had arrived, that woman was wounded 
all over her body. Then accordingly, they asked her. - 


“Why do you want to know? Is it not perhaps that your son who 
visited -here wants to kill me?” said the woman. 

“Oh, no, my daughter! Because I thought of you, ‘Doubtless she is 
greatly endowed with spirit. power,’ is why I wish to know in what part: 
you have your vital spot.” 

“Ho, father, I do know. that you are asking me because an attempt is 
to be made against my life!” said the woman; “It is in the middle of-my 
oot.” - : ‘« 

Then, as soon as she had departed, the young man came to see his 
father and mother. - ” oo 

“Ha, ‘At the sole of my foot is my vital spot; that is why no one can 
kill me,’ she says.”’ ; _ 

Then the young man said, “Point the ends of some sticks. Then you 
will stick them upright in the ground: everywhere. Then she will prick | 
herself on them. That is the way we shall kill her,” said the young man. 

As soon as she had gone away, they stuck the little slivers everywhere 
into the ground. ° f 

And so; when she came and told them, “Give me to eat!’’ at once’they 
began to revile her. : . 

“Surely'someone has told you to do this, that you all insult me!” said 
the woman. ** \. ; 

“Yes; my brother has been here,” sdid the litile girl. 


And then with a burning brand she! struck the woman, her sister. 
Then at once, they fled out of the lodge. Then the woman seized her 
. mystic dress, the bearskin robe which she always took when she was about 
to kill, As soon as the woman dashed along, changing, as always, her 
bodily form, at once she ran a sliver into her sole. She fell to the ground. 
And so there that woman was slain who had killed so many people. 


& 
ye “ x 
dow, \ 
Vor the ae! \, hid 
sa MK Boia eageyt oy 
hs ve s 
“had te + 


66 
(13) Little-Snow-Dart a, 


Simon Mimikwas a 
mimikwas. : 


kayds dsah néhiyawak, miséw dlénaw ; wikiwdwa intiio-mikiwahpah, 
mihtsdtiwak awdsisak. 

kitahtawd dh-pipohk mithtsdt awdsisak ma-mdtawiwak mistikwah ; 
sdsimdwak, mitdtaht nisusép. dkwah sdsimdnah dkunih mitihtéwak. 
awiyak ith puyuyiisih usdsimanah, dkutd t-6h-pd-kiwdtstk. 

Gkusi sipwihidwak. piyis nisu pikuh aydsinwak.2 piyisk néwdw na- 
nipawak ; Gh-utdkusihk dkwdayadk utihtéwak usdsimadnah, dyaké h-apisisisit 
usimimdw, .dyaké napdsis usdsimdnah. dkust dyaké iskwdéydts utthtéwak 
néwéw mwdhis dh-nipdtsik. dkusi usihtawak mistikwah uhisi wikiwdw. 
dkutah ayawak. 6 . 

mwahist mitataht dh-tipiskak, dkwah mistahi ‘mdyi-kisikaw. ndéwu- 
lipiskadw dkuyikuhk mispun. dkusi nohtéhkatéwak, 

kitahtawéh usdsimadnah utindw; wayawiw; pakamisimdw: “ mdal- 
sik !” ttéw. 

ékust dsay Gh-wapahk, kayahté apiyiwah pihtsdyth usdsimanah. dkwah 
wayautw: wiyds mistaht wayawitimihk astiw. dkust dkwah pihtukatiw. 
dkusi dkwah awdsisak mitsisdwak, 

tahtwaw dh-tipiskdk mispun. dkwah wanihdwak ; wikiwahk wani- 
hdwak. kapé-pipun dékuté ayawak. f 

kitahtawd dékwah, “ kiwitan |” tapwd sipwdhiawak. kiwdwak dkwah. 
dkusi Gh-tipiskak takuhtéwak. 

Gkust, “ tant Gh-kih-ayayin ?” 

> “ G-kth-papah-matawdyan. ” - 
dkust kitahamak uhtawiyah. “ kd-kih-witsdwatsik namuya tsi awiyak 
kimist-wandtsihaw ?” ; 
“namuya awiyak ; kahkiyaw npdsiwawak. ” 
“ Gkust kiyadm kanawayimik, ” itwéw payak kisdyiniw. 

dékusi nohtdhkatiwan. dkusi wihtamwak mitsiwin wiyds mistahi Gah- 
‘aydtsik itd kd-kih-tuhtdtsik. dkusi kutakihk tapwaw kisdyiniw, ta~ndtahkik — 
ayistyiniwak mitsiwin, itéh. ka-kth-tuhtdtsik awdsisak. dkust tapwd sip- 
wéhtéwak. taépwdh mistahi pitéwak. 

éh-takuhtdtsik, “tanitah, tanisi dsi-kaskihtaydk mitsiwin mistahi k- 
ayayak 7° . 

‘ nis6simadn Gh-méh-minahut. ” 

“ haw, ntawdts k-dsdsimdnisit hik-dsiyihkasun. ” 

kitahtawé ah-nisitsik awdsisak maka minah sosimaéwak. ma-mitihtawak. 
Gkunih. nikutwasik’ éh-nipdtsik utihtéwak usdsimaniwdwah. kutakah 
mikiwahpah dkula kiydtéwak. tapwih pahtakwan éh-takuhtatsik. 

ksdyini pdéyak: “ takusin k-dsésimanisit. mistahi manitowiw ; aka 
wiyah mawindhuhk ; nama wiya ka-kih-sakotsthawaw. ” 


1 Throwing the snow-dart, sdsimdn, animate gender. A Cree friend later made 
me 8 pair: the dart consists’ of a cigar-shaped: piece of light wood, about 5 inches 
long and sbout 1 inch in diameter, ornamented with burnt pattern, and fixed on a 
slender reed. These are thrown so as to speed along the ice or hard snow. The sport has 
gone out of usé. 

2 Probably an error. 


. home. 


67 


dkust dh-nipiniyik, “ dkwah ayisiyiniw wi-uhpikihitéw. nikdn utéh 
kik-Gpatsithikéwadw dwaké ana kiw-dhpikit. dkusi kaskihtaw kiw-ohpikit 
anah. kik-dpatsthikuwaw dwaké. nama wiya miywasin kita-météyak.” 

Gtiht wakayésak, adtiht mustuswak éwaké stdnaw mikiwdhpah, kéahtsi- 
wak éhenipahitutsik. . 

“ Gkust nandrisk sakahk ki-dtaskindwaw,” ttiw wakayosah. “ dkwah 
kiyawaw paskwahk kik-otaskindwadw. maskusiyah ka-mitsinawaw. dkusi 
mika niwih-kiwan. ” 

dkusi Kiwiwak. takuhtéwak wikiwahk. 

“ tantih d-kth-tuhtayin maka minah?” 

“ Gh, é-kth-papd-métawdyan.” 


“ah, ponihtah ; dkaya kthtwim papd-métawéh. isim ka-misi-wa- 


nalsthdw awdsis, kuntah kd-ppdmatsihuyin ; nama wya tahkih ka-sakotsihaw 
ayisiyiniw. ” ; : 

“namuya. kakikéd kahkiyaw dkwah nisdkotsthawak, d&h-méa-mitu- 
niyimakik anikih ka-wiw-dhpikitsik. usém namuya ta-kih-miyw-uhpikiwak 
ayisiyiniwak, tapitawih matsi-nodtsihituydkuh. dkusi kiyawaw ispimthk 
kik-dtaskindwaéw. dkwah niya asiniwatsthk mik-otaskin. kakikd nka- 
pamihaw ayisiyiniw anah kaw-dhpikit. dkusi pikuh t-dsiw-uhpikihitéw 
ayisiyiniw. usdm nikitimakdyimaw, aka wihkdts dh-nahih-papdmatsihut 
ayisiyiniw, tahkih dh-astahdyék ta-ma-misi-wandtsihdydk. dku pikoh Gh- 
wapahtaman, ta-miyupayik im dskiy.” 

dkusi nandnisi-sipwaéhtdwak. wistah-sipwihtéw ; kiwdpamdw lasint- 
watsihk dh-tsimasut ; wihkimakusiwak ; sisthtapihkwanak siyihkdsowak. 
Gwaké yahkih kahkiyaw kd-kth-paskiyawdt tahtoh kd-maisihiwayit. 


dkusi kahkiyaw. 7 


Among the people of old there was a large town; their houses were 
ordinary lodges of skin. There were many children. 

At one time, in winter, many children were playing with sticks; they 
were throwing snow-darts, twelve of them. They followed the snow-darts. 
From wherever anyone’s snow-dart stopped in its course they would go 


So they set out. At last only two were left. Four nights they slept 
on the way; not till the next morning did they reach the snow-dart of the 
smallest one, the youngest brother, that boy’s snow-dart. This one they 
reached last, after four nights. Thereupon they built a tent for them- 
selves out of sticks. There they stayed. . . 

' On the tenth night came a great storm. For four nights it snowed. 


' So they began to be hungry. . 


Then at one time, he jook his snow-darts; he went outside; he threw 


them on the ground: “Hunt!” he told them. 


Thereupon, when daylight had come, there suddenly within the lodge 
lay his snow-darts. Then he went outside: a great store of meat lay out- 
side the lodge. Accordingly he brought it in. So the children ate. 

Every night it snowed. They were lost; at home they were given up 
as lost. All winter they stayed there. 

Then at one time, “Let us go home!” So they set out. They went 
home. *At nightfall they arrived. " 

Théh, “Where have you been?” 


63 


“Playing about here and there,” 

His father forbade him to do that. ‘You have not brought to grief 
any of those who went with you?” 

“Not one; I have brought them all home.” 

“Then you may as well take care of them,” said an old man. 

For his people there were starving. So they told that they had much 
food over at the place where they had gone. Then the old man-called out 
at the other- lodges that the people were to fetch food from the place where 
the children had been. So they set out. They really brought a great deal. 

When they arrived, “But how did you manage to have so much food?” _ 

“Because my snow-dart killed game.” 

“Very well, then your name shall be Little-Snow-Dart.”. 

Then again, at-another time the two children threw snow-darts and 
followed them. After six nights on the way they reached their snow-darts. 
There they visited some other lodges. The report went round that they 
had come. - . 

One eld man said, “Little-Snow-Dart has come here. He has great 
spirit-power. Do not attack him; you will not be able to defeat him.” 

Then, when summer had come, ““Now mortal. man is to come into the 
generations of his life. In the time ahead he will make use of you, that 
one who is now to come into life. In this way he will be able to live. He 
will make use of you. It is not good that any longer you should eat one 
another.”’ ~ 
* Some were bears and some were buffalo who lived there in the same | 
, Village of tents but killed each other. ° 

“And so in different places of the woods you shall have your place of . 
abiding,” he said to the bears. ‘And you others shall dwell on the prairie. . 
You shall eat grass and herbs. And now I shall return to my home.” 

So they went back home. They arrived at their camp. 

‘And where did you go this time?” 

_ “Oh, I have been ‘playing here and there.” 
: “Now, stop it; never again go about to play. For you will bring the 
children to. grief wandering about in this needless way; not always will you 
defeat people.” 

“No. For all time now I have defeated them all, with the thought of 
those who are to come into life. For mortal men will not be able to live 
properly, if you continue like this in your evil pursuit of one another. 
Therefore, you shall have your abode. up aloft. , And I shall dwell in the 
Rocky mountains. For all time I shall take care of mortal man, that one 
who is to come into life. Only so will the generations of man be able to 
live. For I have taken pity on mortal man, who can never roam about 
since you affright him with the fear that you will bring him to destruction. 
Only. in this way do I see a good future course for this earth.” 

. Accordingly they departed in various directions. He too departed; 
you can see him standing in the Rocky mountains; pleasant is their scent; 
fir-cones they are called. That is he who of yore overcame all thé beings 


of evil power. 
That is all. 


t 
t 


69 


(14) Little’Snow-Dart " I 


ae i} 
syAdam Sakewew , ; i 
sakéwaw.' . - ols i 

kitahtawd wikiwak ayisiginiwak, nisu - ukimawak, pdyak mais 
uhidwiya, kitahtéwd awdasisak mihisét sdsiméwak. ly 

“mahith kakwitsiyawdhitutak Gma ka-sosiméyahk kahkiyato(| mahtih 
awina néhta-sdsimat, awina wahyaw ké-pakkisineyit, ” itwaw pay k awasis 
ohkuma éw-ohpikihibut. ; | 

° Gkust sdsiméwak. dakwah ati-utindwak sdsimana. piyis pa ak usdst~ 
ména, ayisisiniyiwa konthk. pimitisahwdwak., wid 

“ aka wiya awiyak nohtaw kita-kiwéw !” itwéw. / i 


. ‘Gkwah piyisk d-sakayik dkutah ati-séskipayiyiwa, a-mitihtals ohi sdsi- 
mana, G-paskwayik dkutah wahyaw, é-sakayik ékuté ispisiyiwa. 
Kitahtawé dw-utakusiniyik, avin oma, ki-mthtiskayiw. af ikdts pah- 


yiw ; mispuniyiw. 
'* otah ayatak. ka-kawatsindnaw. mdnukdtak ; mihtikuao 
atiht maskusiyah kit-otinamwak. misthiak kikinaw, ” ttwaws 
ékusi usthtawak. piyisk, ah-tipiskayik, kisihtawak.i'; [Peecpaniait 


'! 
rt 


kisimuytw ; kwayask Omis ist tsimasuyiwa usdsimana. mi uhk yatini- 
{ 


fp usthiatak. 


kdydpits mistaht mayi-kisikdyiw. vf 

“ Gkaya. kiwitak. ka-kawatsindnaw,” itwéw; “ nikyhtak. dkwah 
6tah skivdhlamahk tsah-tsahkakundhamuk.  pésithkuk “ke bsimaniwawak 
kahkiyaw, ’ ’ ttwaw. 

miydw. kakkiyaw dkwah wiskwahtamihk tsimahéw ‘ahi yaw sdsimana., 
dkwah kiksépa wayawiw, dh-utinat kahkiyaw sdsimana. nikamaw. 

“ niyak ! matstk 1” itwéw awa, sdsimana ka-kth-itis umiht, Ka-kih- 
“‘pimitisahumtht. ~ . a \ 

dkusi dhtsi piku mayi-kisikdyiw.” . 

.dkwah éw-utakusiniyik, “ kahkiyaw sahtukth. otal awayak iskwah- 
tamihk mina wiskwahtamihk, " ttwéw. ‘ 

piyis dkusi totamwak. kitahtawé awa ka-kih-mitih miht usésimana 
dyuku ka-pihtukakutsiniyit usosimana. é-kth-itaskotuyit usdsimaniwawa, 
Gkus isi itaskdtuyiwa. kahkiyaw mihkowiyiwa sdsimana. }). 

“ Gkaya wayawik !”’ itwdw. , i 

. kétahtawé ké-pah-pitihkuhtintyik kikwa. 

-  - &k-isi-pitihkuhtiniyik kékwah, ‘ch haw, awah 
awa ka-kth-mitthtimtht usostmana. 

dkusi wayawiwak. awin oht, nanattshk pisiskioah, wwaskwapayihosah, 
nandtuhk dhtasiyrt pisiskiwah, oki ah-minahutsik $6 imanak, éwakunik 
éy-apuhtatsik, usdm d-manitowit awa usdsimana ka-mit ptimiht. 


1? 


ayawik 1” itwew 


iuatssohtenosinin oy 
i ust”; medial -dtaydh- 
y? with post-medial 


1 When I asked Sakewew to tell me a last story, he said, ne 
“have run entirely out of sacred stories.” (Initial stem mdst-: 
kand-, formed from the noun dleyohkan: “prehistoric ate 
-d-; Plains Cree in this way freely forms a medial from any no compound final -Agin, 
consisting of pre-final -h- : “come down, fall, lie” and animate i trankitive verb final “in). 
At last he produced this story, for which he perhaps delved deep into his memory, since it 
contains details about the contests of spirit- , as well as afnumber of unusual words. 

2In this tale the position of this person is much like ¢ it of} ; Wissbietcha On 
_ Star-Blanket Reserve one of my informants identified the two. ! 

3 Unknown word; translation a guess. © 


A, 


we 


& 


Smis itéyithtam ; “ okt awdsisak ta-wani-kiskistwak. wikiwahk namuya 

ta-pikiskatameat !” atéythtam. 
lapwd dkusth ispayiyiw. , 

“haw, usthtak tésimitsikanah kiyam mihtsét 1” itwitw. 

dkust ‘totamwak oki awasisak. d-tipiskayik, dsay mina ntumdw sési- 
ména. 

“ aka wiya ékwah métawakék oki, sdsimanak, atuskak. tisipitsikanah 
usihiak kiyikaw. otah akutak kahkiwakwah pihtsayihk, ” itwéw. 

akust totamiyiwa ohi awdsisch. mayaw ah-wapaniyik, say mina 
nikaméw kiksépa, d-sdsimat, “ matsik !”’ dh-itdt sdsimana. 

dyputakusiniyik, “« pihtuik kahkiyaw a tawayak iskwahiamihh wisk- 
wahtimihk mina 1” itwéw. 

dkust tétamwak. dsay mina pthtukdkutsinwak sdsimanak, dsay mina 
Gpuhtdwak. dkuytkuhk dstd-kistkdyiw. dkuyikuhk métsikdyihtamwak 
awdsisak, éh-mitsisutstk, 

akusi ttahkamikisiw ; pdyakwaniyiw dh-tétahk. piyisk ima kd-misi- 
sakaytk, dwakd wasakém akutdyiwa wiydsah, nandtuhk mitsiwinah, wiyawaw 
Gh-atuskatsik. mistahi misihtawak. 

kitachtawé awa matsthkiwis kiksépa kd-wayawit, d-ntawi-sikit, dkuté 

Gw-uhtiniyik, kd-pd~paswdmakwaniyik. nbéséskam, é-pasut, é-paswimak- 

asikdt. kiksépa kisiwék itéyihtam. pdydhtik pimuhtéw. ima ka-mahkask- 


Aodyaytk Gh-utihtahk, dsay uidkusiniyiw. kdéyapits paskwdyiw. wayat- , 
- sawiw. tahki paskwémakwaniyiw. mitunt Ghutakusiniytk, takuhtéw. 


* dyahd, kistdsinaw takusin ! mahith asamihk. nohtéhkaléw,” itwéw 
awa sésimanah kd-kih-mitihtimiht. 

Gkusi kapd~tipisk mitsisow ; nohtéhkataw ayisk. 

dkwah awa k-Giuskahat sasimana déwaku 6mis ttwaw : “ mahtih ta-mayi- 
hisikaw, aka ta-kiwdt awa nistés, dka kit-dtsimut !” ttwéw. 

tapwd ch-wapaniyik, mayi-kisikayiw, “ 

akusth omisth itwiw: “ matsik !' ttéw sésimanah. 

dw-uwlakusiniyik, “‘ ohtukdk kahkiyaw !” itwaw ; “' kay-tiapiyak, 
dkus ist tawapik £7 ttwéw. * 

dkusi tétamwak. kitapamdéw awa~matsthkiwis.° tapwa pihtukdpayiyiwa 
sdsimana, kuntah k-sydtamiyit® awdsisah, dh-miywéyihtamiyit, dh-wiyinth- 
takdyit. ‘Gkusi kitapaméw. | 

“a, nisimitik, ka-witsitindwaw. usam ninohtahkatan itéh k-ohtuh- 
téyan, aka awiyak G-kth-minahut, dh-nohtihkatéhk, pikuh Gh-métawahk, 
dkus Gy-isi-mitsisuhk, 2 dtwdw, 

“ha, nistésd, namuya ka-kih-mwéstatitindn. usdm nam awiyak kahta- 
aytwiw. atah ; pisistk awasisak, ”’ diwéw awa sdsimanah k-Gtuskahat. 

payakwan ah-totahk: 

kitahtawa é-wayawit kiksdpa, “ mistahi misihtawak oki ha-kah-wandhilt 
sit awasisak,” itdychtam, Gh-wiyinut, “ nika-kiwan.. nka-ntaw-disimun,”" 
dh-itéyihtahk, . _ 

thiwaw. dkusi kiwdpahtaw. ; : 
. estkih wikiwahk éh-thtat, “ haw, miahtih nistis ka-kiwdét, ‘ nka-ntaw- 
atsimun,’ k-dtaéyihtahk, fa-woni-kiskisiw ! namuya kit-atsimow mu ttdyih- 
am awa sésimanah ka-kth-mitihtimiht. 


' 1 Unknown word; translation & guess. 

? That ‘is, the two chiefs, in person or by proxy, would engage in contests of magi 
power, each setting as stakes an agreed number of his followers, to be killed and eaten. 
the other side, in case of defeat. 


‘ \ . 71 


Sa ‘ 


wani-kiskisiw awa matsihkiwis. ohtdwiya wikiythk Gh-pihtukdt, kunta 
pikw tsi ay-itwiw. dkusi namuya. 

kitahtawd mina éh-kawGhkatusut, aka kale Gh-mitsit, dkust kiksépa 
d-ntawi-sikit, ka-pd-paswémakwantyth. 

“ ayakunik awdsisak ka~misthtatsik. nba-ntawi-mnitsisen, aléythtam. 

namwéats wih-wayiniw. namuya nohié-wihtam, ‘yaya Gh-nohiahkatat. 
sipwaéhtdw. dh-utdkusiniyik takusin. 

“ maka ming kistdsinaw takusin. asamahk; ta-mtisisow, ” tiwaw. 

dkust tapwéd asamaw. of 

“ hdw, Gtah ka-wa-witsitindwaw, nisimitik,”’ itwdw. 

dkwah mistahi ‘ayawak mitsiwin oki awasisak hei kah-wanihihtsth, 

Gkusi iyitkuhk minah déh-wiyinut, Gkuyikuhk minah, “ nka-ntaw-atsi-. 
mun,’ itéyihtam. ( : 

Gkusi kiwéiw. mitunih tsikt wikiwahk dh-ihtat, “ mahtih ta-wani- 
kiskisitw awa nistés ka-with-dtstmut !”’ jtaythtam. . 

tdpwd wani-kiskisiw. 

““ kakwakanthk! oma é-kih-ndiamaR ? ” ilayihtam. - _ 

dkusi ay-ayéw min ékutah, Kitahtaiwa mina ah-nohtéhkatdl, ch-wayawit, 
mina ka-pasut, Gh-paswamakwaniyik. nitsawadts sipwipahtaw. dsay mina 


ntawi-takusin. 
“ nistmitik, namuy akwéh kiwth-uhisi-nakatitindwadw, ” itwdw awa, 


ay-ayaw Gkutah. wyikuhk mina Gh-wiyinut, kiwaw. i 

“namuy dkwah nikq-wani-kiskisin ; j; awésisak masthiawak, ” dttwdw 
askaw. 

mwahtsi é-viheyohtanahh wikiwaw, « awasisak ” ‘todo ; wani- 
kiskistw. 

dkus isi ay-ayaw ohtawiya wikiyihk. 

Kitahtawé mina ah-kawdhkatusut, mina kiksapa ch-wayawit, kéydpits 
pd-paswimakwaniyiw. 

“ Gyukunik nisimak ka-misihtatsik |” itayihtam. 

soskwats sipwdpahtaw. dysutakusiniytk, takupahiaw. dkusi ay-aydw 
min ékutd. - ’ 

“ tdnist awa dsiythkasut, awa ké-tipayimiyak, awa nisim? ”’ 

tee atah wiya wih-wihiydkuh, “ kosasimanisiw,” kik-dsiyihkasind- 
wiw,' kth-itwéw. dkust nama wihkats niwihdnan, ” itik awasisah. 

iyikuh mina dh-wiyinut, “hd, nisim; tams oma Gsiyihkasuyan 7” 
ttéw. 

“6, nistisd, uki manah ‘ha-witsawakik, ‘ k-Gsdsimanisiw, ’ nitisiyah- 
katikwale. dkust mana itwiwak. ” 

dkwah kiksépa ka-Kiwat,-“ nisim k-bsosimanisiw misihtaw, ” itnodtw 
dskaw. 

wikiwahk d-takusthk, ‘“ namuy dkwah ta-wani-kiskisiw ; 3 kiydm kite 
atsimow nistis |” itéyihtam. 

dkus ah-pihtukat wikiwahk, “ nisim misthtaw usdsimanisiv. nikéh- 
ulindw, a&h-tapahkémak, nohiah,” itaw ohiawiyah ; “ dtah awa nohkum~ - 
inan Kauai éwaku dsisima ‘ka-misihtayit. maka nnitarwi-wihtamowaw 


1 Unknown word (or phrase’). - 


72 


~~ nohkum,” ttwaw ; “‘ waépahkth kite-pd-pitstw' kéhtdwinaw nohkum minah. 

‘-kahkiyaw ayisiyiniwak ta-pé-pitsiwak,’ Gh-itwat nisim k-dsdsimdnisiw,” 
itdéw ohtawiya. a 

_ dkust tapwaé miywiyihtam aw ékimaw, d-ntuhkdmuyit awésisah. 

“ kitawdsimisiwdwak- ka-kth-wanihdydkuk kinitawdyimikuwdwak, dh- . 

misihidtsik, ” itwiw. i 

* tapwd kiksépad kahkiyaw pitsiwak, awa kutak min okindw. tapwd 
mitunth dw-utdkusiniyik taku-pitsiwak. ntsawdts ay-dpihtaw ayéwak ohi 


_ a7 wilydsah, . . 


“ kutak aw ukinaw nama naéntaw kik-dtuhtandwéw. namuya kikiwahk 
kak-dsi-kiwandwéw. dtah kik-dyénawadw kikindhk. niya néhkum askaw 
wikihk nik-dpin, dskaw kistésinaw wikiwahk. dkusi kika-totdndnaw,” 


itwaw. . ; 
dkwah piyak .mustus utakisiyah d-ki-pasahkik, éyakunih ntawi-miydw 
ohkumah, 


“nohku, kanawdytht shi. dkdya wihkdts utinah,”’ itwdw. 

adkwah kiyipa-atih-kitanawdwak. . 

dmis itwéw naha kutak ukiméw ; — dh-utakusiniyik péh-tah-tahkis- 
kamwan wikiwdw matsihkiwis :.“ ékwah mina kimdtawdndnaw, nd-mitanaw 
kit-ihtasthk, " itwiw dwak ana.ukimaw. Co 

Ghidwiya tapahtiskhwayiyiwa. ° 

dkusi, ‘‘ tanisi, nistisd,. dy.tsi-mdtawahk ?” ; 

“hd, nisim, miskwontth dh-mdtawdhk: dkusi’ ména kéhtawiyinaw | 
pikuh d-nd-nakdhiwat,?”’ itaw. 

“hah, . nistésd, tahtwéw ké-mdtawéhk,, ta-nah-nisindniwiw,” itwaw 
awa ka-kih-misihtat. uo : . 

“ * kitah-nd-nisindniwiw,’ itwéiw nisim,?? ildiw.oht. 
. Gkw d-wdpaniyik, ituhtd@wak. + dkwah awa k-Gdsdsimanisiw ituhtéw. 
pott aydndndw-mitanaw mimawuw thiasiwak wiyawadw awa ch-dstwatutstk. 
_ \ . 


1A preverb particle, such as pédh: “hither” is freely added to: any verb, e.g. pah- 


_ tulldw: “be walks hither.” , An initial stem, such as pd-: “hither,” is “never added to a 
word; but appears only before non-itial elements, as in pépahtaw: “he runs hither,” 
where -pahta-: “run” 1s an element that never occurs in word-initial: Thus, ‘ 


S) 


a] 


particle: ” initial stem: : ‘ “ . 
papih .- papam-: “around, about,” eo 
wih - . a-: “thither, thus,” . * 
uhtaih, oh uht-: “thence, therefore,” . 


‘and many others. - . 
. _., There is overlapping of two kinds. In central Algonquian certain initial and non- - 

- initial stems are alike (except for the difference implied by these namies), e.g. Cree pilsi- 
and ~piisi-: “moye camp,’”’ whence pdh-pitsiw and pépitsiw : “he moves camp hither,” - 
probably with some difference of meaning. . 

’ The other kind of overlapping ia peculiar to Cree, and probably due to phonetic 
alterations which shifted the boundary between ¢ (which occurs at tlie end of many initial 
stems) and is (which occurs-as the penult of many particles). Thus pdtedstam-; “facin, 
hither,” as, e.g. in pdtsdstamuhtdw : “he walks facing hither” looka as though it containe 
8 preverb particle *pdtsih : “hither,” which otherwise is unknown in Plains Cree, or else 
an initial stem Pais a form unparalleled in Cree and in the related-languages. The initial 
stem here was Bally *pdl-; Cree pdtsistam- is a phonetic or analogic modification of 
*pdldstam-, cf. Menomini pita’namdhnew : \“he walks facing hither.’’ Similarly Cree 

 misatim : “horse” for *mistastim (or *mists-astim, or *mis-astim). Cf. Introduction. — 

. * Freely formed secondary derivative nakdhtwaw: “he stops people,” from a freely 
formable *nakdhdw, *nakahtéw : “he stops-him, it”; cf. sakuhdw, sdkuhtdw: “he over- 
.comes him, it,” and sdkuhtwaw: “he overcomes people.” Yet the actual translation is 
8 guess. : an oe pe . 


7 
73 
dkus dw-utihtahkik miskwamihk, dkwah awa kd-manitowit kutak ukimaw 
uskinikima, dwakuni ndtd si-kwaskuhtiyiwa miskwamihk. potih nikikwah 
ka-kokiyit miskwamihk, dkwah nétd tiwakdm dkutd.ka-moskipdyit. kawih 
kokiyiwa, dkwah dtah itah _ka-kih-uhtsi-kokiyit, dkutah . wdh-pd-pasikéyit 
ayisiyiniwak, 
dkwah matsihkiwis uhtawiya dsi-kwaskuhtiyil, pot dwa sdkwds kokiw 
itah kd-kiw-uhtsi-kokiyit nikikwah. itah ka-kth-pdkupdyit, dkuld pikundw 
awa matsihkiwis uhtdwiya. dsay mina kdw-uhtsi-kokiyit, dkutah uhtsi pi- 
. pasikéyiwa uhidwiya. 
sakuwdw matsthkiwis, ‘ ndh-nam dwiyak |?” dh~itwit. 
“namuya | kipaskdyakawinawaw. . kunt itah miskwamiyah kih-pik- 
waskawat kohtdwiy, ‘ndh-nam -  Gwiy ryak p ka-kih-twahtanaw |" itaw ; 
“maka tapi-pimutam,! " itaw. 
dkwah awa kutak misiwé tsah-tsdhkasinahikdsow.  kawipayihow, 
kuntah dh-att-kah-kwétipipaythut dyini-kinusdw. namwits pisuskawdw 
miskwamiyah. ndidh tawakiém mina dkutd dh-wayawit, dkutéh uhtst pa- 
patsdstamuhidw awa ayisiyiniw ha-kinusdwit. 
‘dkwah awa k-dsdsimanisiw nikamiw, dh-pakdskwahikdt usésimdnah. 
“ nikik misinthdw? |” 
Gh-itutamul, kawipaythéw : amisk. amiskowiw. pakamahwatsi misk- 
wamiyah, anta misiwé kd-ma-matwdskupayiytk. 
pah-pimituhtéw, d-nikamut, “ nikan ntamiskowin 1” Gh-itwit. 
kakiw. ndté tawakam kitahtawé miskwamiy kuntah kd-tsimasut, misk- 
wamty dh-wayawiwdpiskawat. 
kunt dkwah sdkuwéw matsihkiwis, ipispaskwatowi-pakamakan ah- 
tahkunahk. kahtsindhéwak dh- sakotsihihtsik. hah, paskiyakdw k-dsdsi- 
manisiw. 
haw, dkwah dw-utdkusiniyik, kisiwahtwéw matsthkiwis htdwiya. 
" nkutwasu-mitanaw kit-dhtasindniwiw wdpahkih. ‘ na-nd-nisindn- 
iwiw,’ itwdw,” itdw. . 
“¢Gha’ ,’ itwa, misim, ° * ttwdw. 
asay dkust kiksépd, “ tanisi dy-isi-mdtawdhk, nistdsd ?” shai. 
“ ndyak wanaskdl’ dh-wth-pimutamihk. dyaku mdna sdskwats nipaski- 
yakawinan, ” dtwaiw matsihkiwis. 
kokstipa tluhtdwak. ha, tapwa nisusdpu-mitanaw, ayisiyiniwak ayawak 
’ dkutah. 
“ dkwah awa nikin ké-pimutahk nisutsihis kita-pataham !” itwdw awa 
k-dsdsimanisiw. 
potih-tapwa dkuyikuhk patahamiyiwa. 
shiawiyah dkwah pdmutamiytt, “ tstki nisutsihts, apisis ayiwakdsis ta- 
pataham awa |!” itéw uhtdwiya. | 
tapwd dsay matsihkiwis sakuwatawak. dkwah awa kutak dsay mina 
pimutam ; min dwaku kékats tdwaham. | 


” 1The tert pimutam : “he shoots (it)” is used. for taking one’s turn in ‘any kind of 
contest. . 
2 7 Unknown word: translation & guess. 
=U translation a guess. 
‘lf correctly 7 recarded, » probably some , kind of reduplication of piskw- : “ump, ” agin. 
it 


fe I 
ms ane know whether ps payak wanaskat is one or two_words, i.e. whether the 


pendent word wanaskdt is found in Cree or not. 


@ 


Ne 


74 
dkwah awa usésimanah isiwdpiniw. simak kunt id ttakutsiniyiwa, 
pis kwaskipayiyiyiwa. potih kwayask kd-inskistamiytt wsdsimana ; tawa- 
ham. uhtakutsin awa sésiman, kunta kd-sdkuwdt matsihkiwas, dh-ati- 
pakamahwat hi astwakéwinah. 
hah, dw-utgkusiniytk, - “ah, aydnanéw-mitanaw dkwah kit-dtasinéni- 
wiw;” itu. 
“ tanis Bkwah, “nistdsd 2” \ ; 
“uma ke-soskwak miskwamithk d-kakwé-nakatituhk. nama wihkats 
paskiyawawak, ” itwdw. “ 
“ha, dkusi 1” 
wiyapaniyik, ituhtawak. . “ patih asay aydyiwa dkulé ;- dkwah ay-isi- 
sipwihtawak, Ghiawiya awa k-dsdsimanisiw akamihk wahyaw uhisipayi-~ 
7wa. - / ; 
4 itd *tékuhtatsik, “ haw; kimdtawahtanaw ! kikakwé-nakatituhtanaw [” 
itadw matsthkiwis uhtéwiya. 
kawipaythéw, nikikwah dh-ati-soskupaythuytt. mahkautkiyiwa. : 
“haw, nohiah, pimitisahikah |” itaw uhtawiya.. 
_ + Gkwah smis itwayiwa uhtawiya: “ nama nika-ké-atimaw, nikusd:s 
nitatsiwihtk, ” itwéyiwa. : 
éh-kawipaythut, pot dwa digi. wist dytwahk soskupayihow. ; 
dkwah awa k-Gsdsimanisiw: ‘witsi-pakasah dwakuh, “ uskats ch-pawam~ 
iyan, atthkwasiniy® nikth-kitimakdyimik !?” ‘twa, ah-kawipayzh 
kistkutsin aw atihkwasinty. 
dkwah awa k-dsdsimanisiw, “ uskats ih-pawamiyan, akwask kik-a&pin. 
dpthtaw . miskwamihk kika-tahkitsdskiwakisinin® ! itera ; ; “uskats ch- 
pawamiyan, néydhiakaw* niki-kitimakéyimikun |” ita. é . 
‘tdpwd pimitisahwdw. — - 
“ k-dspisakutakt mosasiniyah, dkuyikuhk hik-aspisin, nisosima 
ttwaw. 
tapwa- dy~utihtahk upawimowin, awin 6ma, kiy-akwasknw.: 
“pasakuskiwah mistahi -usépiyiwa ohtawiyd-; tsik akutgh at-dydyjwa. 
- “nohtih, mitsimiw utdh utahk 1” ihusth itaw. a 
nawatsi-mitsimiw sdsimanthk, Gh-ptimat Ghi\nikikwetk.” 
“  kikakwd-nakatituhtanaw [? ttdw. wo LY 


ork 


“ aya’ | ata way Gni nitispisipgyin 1” ttek. 
Gkwah ohi atihkwasjniyah. téhtipitséskiwakisin. 
*\ kikakwd-nakatituhtanaw L-itéw. 

“ dya’ ! itép anih nitispisipayin 1” itéw. it 
tapwi nokasiwawak matsihkiwis uhtawiya, /Gkusi ova ii ae, 


“ « haw, /iyahtasihhe Gkwah !” ctawak. 
akwah piku ta-nipahtht maisihkiwis jnama t-bhsdtoatik. 
“ Gkwah>namiya ka-tapi-~pimutingnaw |” itéwak: ma 
Shtiogh awa k-osbsimanisiw nta nimi awasisah. . en ‘ 
a / w 
2 Probably ‘an error of record; perhaps for Kwdsh- : “testing. to one side. ” os 
2 cea “elk-stone,” .but w val is It? moew-asiniy, mosasiniy : wf ‘moose-stone” is 
a gan-bulle 


2 tah is unknown tome; -perbaps an error of réeord for tiht “unig over or 
ound’ cf. below. The me ~tedskiwak- means ‘ emaud, sticky stu 
‘ Translation a guess; a nayaw-: ‘promontor wg fo 
’ The first two syllables may be "wrotely recorded. 0 / Ly ge 
; .. VS . ; ZL vi - . “ne a 
° ee if, , : i 
‘ A e. 


1 


/ “hiw, awa kéhkuminaw uhtsthkamahk. mituni- t-dydpisdsinwa. 
 tisawatamuk shi utakisiyah,  itwaw. 
dkwah wiydpaniyik, sdskwits ispitsiwak kahkiyaw sisund sdkahikanihk. 
dkwah, “ nisim, Kika-6aki litwan ts?” itdw. 

““ namiuya. _ maskéts usim ayiwak at-dyimaniyiwa,” itaw awe mat~ 
sihkiwis. / i 

mistahih dyimdythtam. 

Gkwah awa nikdn pimutam matsihkiwia uhlawiya: eauitei-paranipid 
ka dsikititeik sthkihpak dkutéwiw, pikw ttah dh-mkwaskawat miskwagny 
yoh ; Gkwah awa matsthkiwis uhldwiya itéwahk k-ayototelkatihtsik! alfute 
wahk. dkwah+kéwi itah wah-pakeupayitst, dkutah uhtsi-kokiw awa at- 
sthkiwis uhtawiya. aw 

“hd, tapwd paskiyawériak ” itwiyiwa. 

ayis tapi-pimutam. xdkwah awa’ k-dsdsimiinisiw wilsi-pakdadh daay 
min dyaku nikamow, “nitamiskowin mya f” dhitwdytt. a 

mitunth misibitiw amish. paékamohahahki, usuy uhtsi misiwi-.ma- 
matwiskupayiyiw. dkusih asawats itéh ‘uhtsi kokiw, kunta mana miskwam-_ 
tyah ka-séhkwdpiyit,? tah piydhnupdyiter kitahtewd “mitun tah? aisunid 
_ -piydkupaytt. / 

dmis itdw ustdsah min ohi amiskwabe: “ iyikuhk takusiniydni, kika- 
" métahpinatawawak, dké ayiwak kih-totamani. iyikuhk takusiniyani ; ; 
. misawats nika-kiskdythtin, awiyak nikan ‘kd~pakamahwat awiya, dkust 
a namuya kwayask kit-dspayiw,” itwéw. 

vo nikamow: “| mayan iwépamakowine 1” ‘itwéw, miskwamthk ‘éh- 

A pabeitsit, . 
papdmuhtdw miskwamihk, kuntah ah-pa-pimituhtat, piyish k-atih- 

-sapupdyit miskwamiyah, tsdhkatahwatsih miskwamiyah, kuntah\ misiwd 
2 4 ka-ma-matudskupayiyit. Ghkami-kituw makwa. piyisk waskitisik, nijiw- 
 ° “Gyiw, Gh-ahkami-kitut. pisk yotinipaydstaniyiw. dkuyitkuhk sdkuwwdw 


- matsthkiwis. 
a. “© namuya wiyawaw nipiy uathtawak { wiya-nisim niply usthtaw | maka, 
/ | 'ayikuhk takuhtéyami,’ é-kih-itwdt nisim | nisu miti-kakdkindwak, dé-with- 
/ méwakik, dh-wiyinutstk. ayis niya nisim nkih-utindw, " itwéw. 


kokiw awa mikwa, akamihk ndté kih-matwd-kitut makwa, dkutaé mina. 
_ piyis ma-mahkaskaw Gmta sdkahikan. piyis nama kékway maskwamty. 
" , kitahtawé pa-kokit blah kisiwak, cs 
va ‘piydkupit, “héw, adstamitik | kahkiyaw dkdya’ awiyah nipahink ! 
Gstamitik 1 itiw; . “éhwah Ghi utsakisisah tahtuh dh-pdpayihtatsik, 


uhpimdh kil-ati-ripawiwak. tahtuh aka dh-papayihiaisik mina, + dwakiinil . 


uhpimé ta-nipawiwak,” itwdw. wo, 
dkwah atiht papayihtawak: . *, 


a 
whe 


siwindwaw,! atiht maskusiyah, .‘ ntaw-uyasuwdh 17 d- kiy-tikawiydn. kiya, 


1The allusion is plainly to, the helldiver duck; the difficulty is that the present 
_ passage seems to imply a difference between the “diver-duck” (eitkitp) and, “the one that 
is tnade nxerry over. oY 
\ *7Unknown word} uérha 8 error of record. 
*. 7One expects miwirpima, bwin ; if the text i is correct, it contains an archaic or 1 pseudo- 
archaic medial stem -amdkw- : “oon.” 
“Probably red hk for the final t; I have go translated. 
* Allusions to o the lynx may be introduced on my account, 


. . 3 
“ee , . . H 
' wt 
. - y 
a ‘ 
/ , ' . e 
ad “a “a ’ ‘ 
: , hae 4 so ‘ “ 
: . . s 


“a, kiyischkamikisit,* tahtuh ia-papayihtayak, mistikwah kik-Gmit- 


‘nisldsd, ayisiyiniwak nihtawikitwawi, ubpikitwawi, ‘ pahkwatsow,§” . hike 


nA 


’. the floor, opposite the doorway. Then, early. i 


iets — ae 


wot . ° 


datyihkatikwak ; kiya sakdhk+ty 
say ‘kikis-oyapin. dkwah kiyénohtah, ‘ sdkwés,’ kik-isiyihkatik ayisiy- 
iniw ; nipihk kik-otaskin ; maka nandtuhk kékway kika~mitsin, kindpikusak 
wiyds ; ka-tahté-wiydsiwit kik-ch-pimatsihun. ha, dkusi nandnis, nandtuhk 
kik-Gsi-~pisiskiwindnaw. ayisiyiniwak nihtawikitwawi, kahkiyaw _kika- 
sékotsihikunawak, _niva, ‘ kihtsi-wapi-mikwah,’ nik-dtikawin. maka namuy 
otah nivih-aydn. _ ka-misdk nipty dkuté niwth-ayan ,” itwdw. 
dkuyikuhk dskwak, atayohkéwin. » 

Once upon a time some people dwelt in a place, and there were two 
chiefs, and one of them was Silly-Fellow’s father. ‘Fhen at one time many 
of the children played at throwing snow-darts, 


ik-ch-pimdtsihun ; ‘dkusi kiya, nistasé,. 


“Let us all try to outdo each other throwing snow-darts, and-see- who - - ~- -- 


is the best at it, whose snow-dart lands farthest away,” said one child, 
who was being brought up by his grandmother. 
So they threw their snow-darts. Then they went and picked up their 


snow-darts one after the other, as they came to them. At last only one 


boy’s snow-dart was left lying on the snow.. They went after it, 

“Let no one go home before we have got it!” he sajd. 

At last they found that it had gone into a,aW6od. “As they, followed 
the track of that snow-dart, across a far stret¢h of prairie there, into the 
woods it had sped. ee: 

Presently, as evening came on, they were deép in the wodds. It was 
near sunset; there, standing straight upright in the snow, like this, was 
the boy’s snow-dart. Just then the wind began to blow; it snowed. 

“Let us stay here. .We might freeze. Let us set up a shelter; let-us 


build a hut of wood. Some of you are to gather grasses. .Make our hut - 
. big,” he said. - as soe a 
, ‘Accordingly, they built it, At last, when night came, they had finished ~ 


it, The next morning it was still very stormy weather. 

“Let us not go home. We should freeze,’ he said; “Gather firewood. 
And here by the door, dig away the snow. All of you' bring me your snow- 
darts,” he’ said. , ; 

-They were given to him. Then he stuck all the Snow-darts on end into 

the morning, he went 


out, taking all the snow-darts. He sang. 
' “Be off! Hunt!” be sang whose snow:dart had been followed to that 


‘place, had been: pursued across the land. 
) The storm kept on. 


Then, in the evening, “All of you come indoors. Form two lines from 
the doorway to the 6pposite wall,’”’ he ordered. . an 
Soon they. had done this. Then presently the snow-dart of him whose 


snow-dart had been tracked, came flying into the hut. In the order*in™ 
' which their snow-darts had gone, in that order they now came, one follow- 


ing the ‘other. ' All the snow-darts were stained with blood. 
:‘Do-not go out ofthe house!” hegsaid. © | ~ . 
Presently some things were falling with a repeated thud. ” 
When those things had fallen with a thud, “Tere, now’ go out!’ said 
he whose snow-dart had been tracked. . ar 


B- 


~ af 
Pay 


‘a 


V7 -2 

Then they went out. What was there, but all kinds of ganie-animals, 
jumping deer, all the game-animals there are? For these snow-darts had 
killed game, and it was they were supplying meat, so much of a manitou 
person was he whose snow-dart had been tracked. rn 

Thus he thought: -‘“Let these children forget.’ Let ‘them not ‘get 
homesick!’ he thought. a 

Really, it was so. - 

“Come, set up a great many drying” frames!” he said. 


Those children did as he had bidden. _ At dark, again he: asked for the 


snow-darts. , 

“Do not now play, with, these snow-darts., Work. Set up drying frames 
everywhere. Hang up thé dried mbat indoors here,” he ordered. 

The children did as he said. ' soon as day broke, early in the morn- 
ing again he sang, as he flung ‘the snow-darts, bidding the snow-darts 
“Hunt!” ee 

At nightfall, “Come inside, all of ‘you! - Form two lines from the door 
to the opposite wall!” he ordered. 

They did so. Again the snow-darts came flying into the house. Again 
they had supplied meat. “By this time the day was done. The children 
were happy, because they could eat. 

That was the way he managed ‘things; ‘it was always the same thing 
that he did. In time, all over that large grove pieces of meat were hanging, 
al kinds of food supplies, 4s a result of their work: They had a big store 
of meat. 

‘Then at one time, when this Silly-Fellow had gone out i in the morning, 
eee eee , trom the ‘direction whence’the wind was blowing there came 


the smell of fat meat. He set out in the direction of the scent, following | 


the smell of fat meat. In the early morning he thought it was near. He 


walked slowly. When ‘he reached that big wood, it was already evening.-~ 


Again he came to open country. “fe broke into a run. All the while he 
ree the scent of fat meat. When it was well on toward dark, he got 
there . ae em 
“Qho, our elder brother has’ Some! Give him something i to eat. He 
is hung 7 said he whose gnow-dart had been tracked:.. 
en he ate.all night;for he was hungry. . . @ ~ 
Then the one who made the snow-darts work said, “het there be 
stormy weather, so that this big. brother of mine may not go home and tell 


, = what he has seen!’’ he said. 


Really, the next morning;. thére was stormy weather. 
Then he spoke thus: “Hunt!” he said to the snow-darts. 


Towards evening, “Come indoors, all of you!” he said; -“As you sat 
before, ait now, in two rows!’” he commanded.. 


y did so. ““Silly-Fellow watched them. Really, the ‘snow-darts 


came flying into the house, and the boys:cheered loudly with joy, and set 
about cleaning the game. "Ae watched them. 

“Oh, little brothers, let me stay with you. -I go hungry too much 
in the place whence I come, becatise no.one there can kill any game, and 
all go hungry and eat only as one eats. after a contest, he said. 


3186-6 . os ’ . . 


Oh ey, 


78 


“Oh, big brother, we could not refuse you. Especially, as-there is no 
older person here, but only children,’ said he who made the snow-darts 
work. 

He did always the same thing. 

Then, early one morning, as he went out of the house, “A great supply 
.of food have these children who have been lost,” he thought, and, because 


he had got fat now, “I shall go home. I shall’ go tell what I have seen,” | 


thought he. 

He went home. ' He ran for home. 

‘When he had got near ‘their dwelling-place, “Now then, let my big 
brother who is going home thinking, “I shall'go tell what I have seen,’ let 
him lose his memory! Let him not tell!” thought he whose snow-dart had 
been tracked. 

That Silly-Fellow lost his memory. As he entered his father’s dwelling, 
he said.all kinds of disconnected things. So. nothing came of it. 

After a time, when he was again starved lean, for he had nothing to 
Cb, oc ee eee eee there came the odour of fat meat. 

“That is the boys storing up food. I shall go there and eat,” he 
thought. 

He did not even think of going back. He did not want to tell about 
it, but thought only of his hunger. He started out. Towards nightfall 
he got there. 

“Here comes our big brother again. “Give him something to eat; let 
him eat,” said he. ’ 

So be was fed. 

“Now, let me stay here with you, my little brothers,” he said. 

By this time, much food had those children who had been lost. 

Then, when he had again got fat, again he thought, ‘‘Let me go tell 
what I have seen.” 

Sd‘he went home. When he had got very near their dwelling-place, 
“Let my big brother lose his memory, who is ‘going to tell what he has 
seen!” thought he. 

Really, he lost his memory. 

“What on earth was I going after?” he thought. ~ 

So then he stayed there again. After a time, when again he as 
- going hungry, as he stepped out of the tent, again he smelled an odour of 

i meat. Off he 1 ran; what else was there ‘to do? Again ‘he reached the 
ace, 
» “Little brothers, this time I shall not- leave you any more,” he said. 

He stayed there. When he had got fat again, he went home. 

‘ “This time -I will not forget: the boys have a supply of meat,” he 
said at intervals. 


Just as he was‘about to open the door-flap of their tipi, ‘The. boys?” ; 


‘ he said; he had forgotten. noe 

So then he stayed in his father’s tipi 
___ After a time, when he was again lean with hunger, as he stepped. out 
of doors in the morning, again there came the. scent of fat meats. 

“That is my little: brothers laying up a store of meat!’’ he thought. 

At once, off he ran. Towards nightfall, he go there, on the. run. So 
then he again stayed there. 

“What is hig a who directs you, this little brother’ 8 of mine?’ , 


“ 


Sane . o 


} 


{ 


79 

“ ‘When here you wish to call me by name, ‘‘Little Snow-Dart, ” you 
will call me,’ he has said. And so we never call him by bis name,” the boys 
told him. 

When he was fat again, “Well, little brother, | what is your name, 
really?” he asked him. 

“Why, big brother, they who are with me here call me ‘Little-Snow- 
Dart.’ That is what they always say.” 

Then, in the morning, when he went home, “My brother Little Snow- 


. Dart has a store of meat, ” he said at intervals: 


When he arrived at’ their’ ‘dwelling-place, ‘(Now let him not forget; 


" Jet my big brother tell what he has seen!”. thought he. 


So, when he entered their tipi, ‘‘My brother, Little Snow-Dart, has 
a store of meat. I have taken him up, adopted him, father,” he told his 
father; ‘‘This grandmother of ours who lives right’ here, it is ‘her grandson 
has the store of meat: But I am going to tell my grandmother about it,” 
he said; “ “Tomorrow. let our father move his camp here, and my grand- 
mother, too. All the people are to move camp to this place,” says my 
brother, Little Snow-Dart,”’ he told his father. . 

Truly, then, this chief was glad that the boys were inviting people. 

* “Your boys whom you had lost want you to come to them, because 
they have got a store of meat,” he said. . 

So, in the morning, they all moved camp, including that other chief. 
Late in the evening they arrived with their camps. They had to share the’ 
meat half and half. ° 

“You are: not to go anywhere i in the precinct of this other chief. You 
are not to go ‘back to your homes. You are to stay; here in our house. As 


for me, some’ of ‘the time I shall stay in my grandmother's tent, and some - 


of the time in my’ big brother’s. That is the way we shall do,” he com-~ 
manded. 
Then he went and gave,his grandmother the entrails of a buffalo, 
which they had dried.’ 
“Grandmother, take care of these. Do not ever take them,” he’ ‘said. 
Then, soon they had eaten up all the food. 
Thus spoke that other chief —at nightfall there came a kicking at 
the tipi of Silly-Fellow and his family: “Now again we shall engage in a 
contest, to the number of forty’,” said that ‘other chief. o, 
His father bowed his head. ‘r Se 
Then, “Tn what way, big brother, is it that they contend?” . 


“Oh, ‘little. brother, it is.a contest on the ice. And-in this our father . 


is always defeated,” he was told. 
“Now then, big brother, in each contest let there be two instead of 
one on a'side,” said he who had made the supply of meat. 


others. 

Then, the next morning, they went to the place. Little Snow-Dart 
went there, too. He saw that eighty was the number of them, all together, 
whom they and thé other were staking. Then, when they had come to 
the ice, the servant of that other chief, who had spirit power, ‘leaped out 


upon the ice. And behold, there was an otter diving into the ice, and there, 


83186—6} 


“ ‘There are to be two on a side,’ says. wy brother,” he told those = 


a 


{ ‘ 


80 


out in the middle of ‘the lake, there it came bobbing forth. Again it dived, 
and back here, whence it first had dived, he rose to his feet in human form. 

Then, when Silly-Fellow’s father leaped forth, there, a mink was 
diving where the otter had dived in. Where the other had come to the 
surface, there Silly-Fellow’s father came up. Then, again, where the other 
had dived i in, Silly-Fellow’s father rose to his feet. 

Silly-Fellow began to cheer, crying, ‘“They are done for!” 

“No! You have been defeated. If your father had broken through 
the ice, no matter where, then we could have cried, ‘They are done for!’ ” 
he was told; ‘“‘But he has merely followed the other’ 8 lead,” he was told. 

The second contestant of the other’side was speckled all over his 
body. He threw himself to the ground, and there was a muskalonge 
flopping about. It did not even touch the ice as it went: Then, when it 
came forth yonder at the centre of the expanse, from there came walking 
in human form that man who had been a.fish. 

Then Little Snow-Dart chanted, pounding with his snow-dart as though 
on a drum. 

“The otter is beaten!” 

As he sang, he thréw himself to the ground: a bédver. He turned into 
; beaver. Whenever he struck the ice, everywhere crashing it would 

reak., 


He walked in different crosswise ways, singing, and, “First I am & 


~ beaver!” were his words. 


He dived. Suddenly over yonder, in the middle of the lake, the ice . 


stood pell-mell on end, as he flung) if; aside in emerging,, 


At this, Silly-Fellow cheered wildly, and laid hold of his knobbed war- 
club. They saw beyond doubt tha they were defeated. Oh, Little Snow- 
Dart had defeated the opponent. ; 

_ That evening Silly-Fellow’s father was enviously hated. 

“Let the number be sixty tomorrow. ‘Let the contestants be in- npairs, 
says he,” be was told. 

. “Say, ‘Yes,’ little brother, ” said he, 

Then, early in the morning, “What ‘kind of contest, is it, big brother,” 
he asked him. 

“One withy is to be shot. In this we are always defeated at once,” 


, said Silly-Fellow. 


In the morning they went there. - Really, there were a hundred. and* 
twenty men there. 


“Now let him who shoots first miss the mark by two fingers!” said 
Little Snow-Dart. 


Really, by even that much the other missed the mark: 
Then, when his father shot, “Close to two fingers, by a tiny bit more, , 


let this one miss it!’ he said of his father. 


Truly, ‘already Silly-Fellow’ 8 side were being whooped at. Then the 


~ second opponent shot at it; hé/too almost hit it. 


Then he flung his snow-dart at it. At once it went speeding i in every 
direction through the air. At ‘last it whirled round. Lo and behold, his 


- snow-dart made straight for the mark; .he struck it square. Down fell 


the snow-dart, and wildly whooped Silly-Fellow, as he Degen to club, one | 


_ after the other, those who had been set as stakes: 


81 


Then, in the evening, “Now, this time let the number be eighty,” .° 


he was told. 

“How is it to be this time, big brother?” 

“Over the smooth \ place on the ice there will be arace. They are never 
beaten at this,’ he said 

“Oh, very well!” ; 

The next morning they went there. There, the others were there 
already; then they started. Little Snow-Dart’s father was coming a Jong 


ways off, from the far shore. ” 
When they got there, ‘Oho, do not forget we were to have a contest! 
Do not forget we were bo ace each other!” Silly-Iellow’s father was told. 

He flung himself down, and off went an otter, sliding over the smooth . 
surface. It went very fast. 

“Come, father, go in pursuit!” he said to his father. 

Then his father said, “I shall not be able to overtake him, my son; 
he has far outdone me,” aaid he. < 

“When he flung himself down, there was a mink, It, too, as well as it 
might, went gliding over the ice: 

Then the opponent who was paired with Little Snow-Dart, said, “When 
- first I dreamt, the elk-ball took pity on me!” and threw himself on the 

oun 
er . Swiftly that elk-ball went speeding. 

Then Little Snow-Dart said, ‘As first. I dreamt, on, ahead you will 
stay still. Half-way across the ice you will flounder as ‘though mired!” 
he said; “When first I dreamt, the treetop took pity on me!” he said. 

Truly, he went pursuing the other. 

“‘As swiftly as speeds a bullet through the air, 0. swiftly will you speed, 
my snow-dart!”’ he said. 

Truly, when he reached that which had beftiended him in dreams, 
why, there he was in the lead. In pitch, in sticky gum his father was badly 
stuck; close to that place the others were passing. — 

“Father, hold fast here, at the rear!” he said to him. 

He seized hold of the snow-dart as it passed him, and overtook that’ 
otter. ~ 

Do not forgét we were racing!” he said to it. . 

~**Ves! Don’t you see how fast I am going?” it answered him. 

Then that elk-ball. It was floundering in something that held 1 it 
stuck fast. 

* “Do not forget we were racing?” he said to it. 

“Yes! Can’t you see how fast I am going?” it said,to him. 

“Truly, -Silly-Fellow’s father and ‘his partner were outstripping the 
others. This made the others angry. 

“Come, in full number now!’’ they were told: - 

Now there was danger that Silly-Fellow might: be killed; they could 
not possibly defeat the others. 

‘“‘And this time we shall’ not do as the’ other does!” they were told. 

Then Little Snow-Dart went and éalled the boys. 

. “Now, go help our grandmother. ‘They, are to be very small; “cut: up. 
those entrails,” he said. 

Then, the next morning, at once they all. went in a body t to the ‘edge . 

. of the lake., . 


e 


82 


Then, “Little brother, shall you win?” he asked him. 

“No. Doubtless the other is too formidable,” Silly-Fellow was told. 

He was very much distressed. 

Then Silly-Fellow’s father had the first turn. His opponent was in 
the shape of a great diver-duck, crushing through the ice wherever it went; 
and Silly-Fellow’s father was one-of those that are made merry over. Then 
from wherever the other came ‘to the surface, from there Silly-Fellow’s 
father would emerge after his dive. ; 

“Ho, truly they are beaten!” said the others. 

. For he was but following the other’s lead.. Then the opponent who 
was paired with Little Snow-Dart, he too began to sing, saying, “I am.a 
beaver, I!” 

Very large was the beaver. Whenever it struck anything with its 
tail, in all directions it went crashing. It,dived from the other direction, 
- and always the ice went breaking, whereveF it came to the surface. Sud- 

.denly it came to the surface right there, very close to the shore. 
Thus he spoke to his big brother and to that beaver: ‘When J arrive, 
. you may begin to slay them, in case I cannot surpass what has been done. 
Not before I arrive; I shall be sure to know it, if anyone before that strike 
down any other. If that-is done, things will not go well,” he said. 

He sang: “I am a white loon, I!” he sang, as he alighted on the ice. 

He walked about on the ice, crossing it in every direction, until at 
last water began to seep through the ice. Whenever he struck the ice 
-with his beak, on all hands it would move with crashing noise. Unceasingly 
the loon gave its call. At last the water stood on top of the ice, as he un- 
ceasingly gave his call. At last a wind began to. blow. Then Silly-Fellow 
whooped. 

“It is not they are making the water to be! Iti is my brother is making 
the. water to be! But, ‘Not before I arrive,’ said my brother! ‘Two of 
them I shall pick out to eat, fat ones. For it was I adopted him as my 
little brother,” he cried. ' : 

The loon dived, and to, yonder on the far shore a Joon was ‘giving its, 
call, and over here ‘another. At last the lake ran to high waves. At last 
the i ice was gone. Suddenly he bobbed up right close by. 

As ‘he came to ‘the surface from the water, “Now, then, all of, you, 
come here! Let none of you slay anyone! Come here!”’ he ‘ordered them; 
“Now as many as cast up these bits of entrail, let them stand off to one . 
side. And as many as do not cast them up, let them too stand to one side,”’ 
he ordered. 

Then some of them threw them up. — a 

“Now then, when the order of things.is completed, as many of you as 
have cast it up, trees shall be your food, and grasses, of some: For, ‘Go 
.- lay down a law!’ I was,.told. ‘You, my brother, when mortal men grow 

. forth and flourish, ‘Lynx,’ they ‘will call you; you will find your sustenance 
‘in the woods; and so you, my brother, haye found your place. And.you, 
_my father, ‘Mink,’ mortal man will call you; by the water you will have 
“your domain; but all kinds of things you will eat, the flesh of little snakes; 
from whatever ereature‘bas flesh you will get your life. So now in different 
directions, into the form of different animals. you ‘will all I go. When mortal 


‘ t 


, kdsun. 


< f Se, 


men come into being, they will overcome ¥f a all. As for’ me, ‘Great: White 
Loon,’ I shall be called. But not heref shall I stay. I ‘shail I stay ‘by the 


Great Water,” he said. / | 


This i is the end of the sacred story. 


oa ; mace etiweccoay 
(15) Pine Root 


f 
Mrs. M aggie Achenam 
ka-vihkask usahk. 


‘ kdlahtawé ayisiyiniwak ah-mibisitukamikisitsik, kihtimiw. ékutah péyak 
uskinikiw, kakiké dh-pimisihk, jpiyis iadn-tahtw ashiy, piyis watapiyah 
misiwd ohpikiniyiwa, tytkuhk Gh-] ahtimit. 

kdtahtawéd d~pa-pimisihk, /kd-pé-kitotiht. ah-itapit, ‘iskwahtamihks ka-° 
paspapiyit uskinikiskwdwah néwis, mistaht mah-miyusiyiwa. 

“ kitimusinaw, ” itik, ‘Llkth¢pa-pimisin watapiw-iyin,  ttik. 

dkust sipwahtdyiwa. i waniskdpahtaw ; paspaskipayihéw uwatapiyi- 
mah; nawaswéw uskinikiskwfiwah. kutakah minah pday-atimik uskiniki- 
wah ;' asa mina kutakah ;: pawiwak napdwak, ch-pimitisahwatsik witsimusi- . 
wiwah, wahyaw aékwah athtatsik, kdtahtawd nakiyiwah. 

“ nitimusa, watapiw-tyih, nistm awa kiwih-wihtamain tdnisiy dstyth- 
kdsut : ndm iskuh k-os ihksak piwanuskwaw isiythkasow. ’ 

.| kwa sipradhicwak, //mistahi misi-piwaniyiw. taswékinéw utakuhpah ; 
dkutah stpah pa-pimy! hidwak, uma k-osdhtsayik ch-utihiahkik, asta-kisik- 


- dkusi_ minah eee mituni hisinayiw ; usitiwawah mitunth 
wiy-ahkwatstwak./ dtataw takuhtawak ; kakéts, kawatsiwak, 
dkust éhewahr sipwahidwak. kétahtawa  dkwah nipdwak, tapwatén 


iskwéwah. : 
“tsaskwali [”’ itiw; “ awa nisim ka-wihtamadtin nastah asivihkasut : 
uskdtsthku-kimiwan nim i skuh k-osahtsak. ” 
ékwoh sipwahtéwak. 
“7, tapwd miyuyihkdsow kitimusinaw 1” mo 
kway’ ch-stpwdhtayit, misi-kimiwaniyiw. Gkwah sipwéhtéwak.-. 
minah: tapwataw. 
“ kutak nistm omis isiyihhasow : kisopwaéw nam iskoh k-osahisak. ” 
mituni kisupwaéw ; ‘dkwah 6k iskwdwak mustaépdékaséwak! iskwéwak 


. tspimthk isih. ah-utihiahkik: -usdhisaw, poni-kimiwan. 


“ha dy 1” itwiwak ; “ tapwd ayimaniyiw Kitimusinaw usimah asiyth-" 


kasoyit. 1? 
* dkawah niyah, nim iskoh k-6sahtsak b-asa-mokkituan nitisiyth- . 


tapwd mistaha asdhtawak oki. 
“ k-asd-méhkituhiaw ! tipwa miywasiniyiw Kitimusinaw wuthowin f 7 
dkwah nétukadsiw Gh-asawdpamaw utawasimisah. 


this feature certainly does not belong hére; it spoils the climactic point of the next | 
stroke. + _ ; ; H 


84 


“ tanisi oh kékway Gh-isi-mohtsowistydk ? ” 
“awas ! nitimusinén uwihiwin' !” itwéwak. 
wikiwadw dh-utihtahkik, dkuyikuhk kwayask pimuhtawak. 
kutak dkwah waskahikanis namuya d-kisdwdyik, dkutah asiwaséwak? 
bkih mosdpéwak. nama kékway kutawdnadpisk. mituni wih-dhkwatsiwak. 
dkwah pdyak pimutéhkwéw ; pihtsayihk dkutah waskahikanisihk ma- 
mominiwak utéhiminah, dtah ‘ah-pah-pahkatsiyit maistsikusah. ; 
dkwah awa kisdyiniw, “ ntawdpam ; -t-dsdmdskatsiwak,” itik uwiki- 
méakanah, . . 
paspapiw : kth-mdé-mimindyiwah minisah. kiwdw. 
“aah ! itwéw kisdyiniw ; ““ mah-mominéwak, itah misawats kiw- 
Ghepimatisiwakwé !” itwéw. 
kthtwaim Gh-tipiskdyik dsa minah ayiwakds dkwah ksindyiw. dsay 
minah pimutahkwiw. dGsa minah moémindwak ayah misdskwataminah. 
“ ntawi-paspapi !” 
ntawi-paspapiw notukdsiw. ; 
. “ ma-mominéwak antki, kiséyiniw. nnohiakkatah , ! ah, ta-mah-maisi- 
wak !? ' 
aékwah matsitisahwawak. 2 wdapamaéwak kwaskwépayihésah, ah-mih~ 
kusiyit. nawaswatéwak. pimudw ; mohtaskikandhusow. 
; kihtwam kiskwéhkwasiw notukdsiw. 
“Gh-pawdtaman , nnahahkisim iskah dh-nipahat  kwaskwépayihosah 
Gh-mihkusiyit, utah isk th-pimipahtat, dh-mowak. ”’ 
dkust Gkwah matstw ; wapamdéw ; pimwdéw dkwah utahk isth ; nipahaw. 
Rawdtsitapaw. pthtukdéw ‘wikiwahk. 
.  “ Gpkunih ka-wih-muwat notukdsiw !” 
. ah-yohtanahk notukasiw, ‘hd dy. dy ! tapwé rakalnoahyakihik, nipa- 
wakanah !” wf 
i misi-wthkubtuk ; * iyawis ‘pakasimihk , ” itwaw. 
tYyauis pakasimdwak ; ; &kwah G-misiuhkuhtutsik, kitamwiwak. dkusi 
dkwah sdkotsihaw usikusah. 
| dkwah atsusisah usihtaw nado. dkwah ituhtéw uwitséwakanah itah 
ka-kih-nipahimtht. -ispahkéw. ‘ 
“ qwas, awas, awas ! ka-pistahutindwaw !”” i 
ké-tstptpayiyit, dsa mina kttak ispahkdw. kdydpits dkus itéw, ka- 
pasikusipahtayit. kdyapit nisu pimisiniyiwah. asay mina ispahkdw ; 
waniskapahtayiwah. dyakw ds dwa kd-waniskapahtat matsihkiwis. 
‘, epmatisiyan tsi?” 
_ °, “dha ;-&k éh-pimatisiyin, maka k-oh-pikiskwdyan, ayiwak ‘hkin i” 
itwaw dsah. 
i, tapwd nimiywdythiin ah-pimatisiyan ! hay hay hay hay Be twa 
dsah. | 
dkwah awa matsihkiwis kah-Mwahtahiskwdwdéw dsah ayiukio. anih. 
namuy ékuyikuh kinwdw atayohkawin ah-kesihtayan. . a 


"That is, if. the old woman discusses their action she i is in danger of unkenowingly 
her son-in-law’s name, which, of ened’ iB tabu to her. 
? From here on the story i is badly shorten 


on) — 


785 
Once upon atime, where some people dwelt, a certain youth Was sO 
lazy that he was always lying down. At last, after I don’t know how many 

years, the fibrous roots of the white pine had grown up all round his body, 
so lazy was he. 

Then at one time, as he Jay there, someone came and called to him. 
When he looked, there, peeping in at the door, were four young women. 
Every one of them was very pretty. 

“Our sweetheart,” they said to him, “has Jain there long enough, has 
Pine-Root Man,” they said to him. ; 

With that they were off. Up‘ he leaped and réat Ke ripped through 
his roots of the pine; he ran after the young women} ‘Another young man 
came and caught up with him; then still another; f ur’ ‘vere the men pur- 
suing their sweethearts. “Then when they had. gone long ways, Presently 
the women stopped. ; 

“Sweetheart mine, Pine-Root ‘Man, I ‘Hea tell you how my younger | 
sister here is called: Up-to-yon-Rise-offtHe-Land-Blizzard-Woman she 
is called.” a . . 

.Then they were off again. There was¥a terrible blizzard. He spread 
out his blanket-robe; beneath it they walked-along. When they reached 
that rise in the land, "the sky grew clear again. . - 

Again the others waited for them. 

“And this other younger sister of mine, Pine-Root, my sweetheart, is 
called Very-Cold-Weather,” she told him. 

With that they were off again. It was very cold; their feet very. 
nearly froze. They barely got there; they were frozen near to falling. 

Then again they set out. Presently, from the men’s party, he called 
out to the women. . 

“Wait!” he called to her; ‘Let me now. tell you how this younger 
brother of mine is called: Rain-of-Awls-up-to-yonder-Rise-in-the-Land?” 

Then they were off. ; 

_ “Goodness me, really a beautiful name has our sweetheart!”., 

‘Then, when they set out, it rained hard. _ Again they set out. Again 

he.called to them. 


t 


‘““My other younger brother is called like this: Hot- Weather-up-to- a, 


*-yon-Hill.” 
It’was very hot; then those women went taked 2 as they went. upward. 
When they reached the hill, it stopped raining. 
“Oh dear!’ they cried; “Really, it is terrible, “the way our sweets | 
heart’ s younger brother is called” . 
“Now, asforme, . 1 2. ee ee ee 
. >. Tam ealled.” - : . 
Traly, at a, great tate those persons 3 walked backwards. 
Truly” beautiful is our sweetheart’s 


name!” 
Now, the old’ woman was on the lookout for her, childreh. 
“What on earth makes you act this crazy way?’ 
“Get away! Our sweetheart’s name!’ they cried. ° 
When they reached their dwelling, only then did they walk properly. 
Into another-ittle house that was not heated the lone men were ann 
There was no stove. . They ¥ were very. nearly frozen, ‘Then one. shot an, 


- 


SO 


NO ' 


arrows de thers tn the tibble fits they ware oatliy, ateiwherrton fran (lie 
hunk, even though Che Hihle bread wore aunplie da tie aald, 

*fiean Ulie ole nine of Hi police “ly (ike Hebets yeh Glaeins tae will din 
frenging, bow wil be war blddon by bln wiles, 

fire preted fp Mey woes oY Dorrie froin bho bod tle wok beads, 

“tgonb ls paid din olde bey ee onbleg, barelod frome the bush, 
they will be Hylig on dik, ao dorbil dd fie, . 

The next adit ih peew even colder Agata he diet narrow, Apada 
Liey ite berries fron die did, mudetoon berelen, ; 

"Ele pene ia? 

Whe old wort woul mod popped in, 

“Those prinond are Gaddig boeeled frome ili tanh, old rate At Nunn 
win S pole datpry! Come, ded thea po hitatbag dl! 

Thon they were driven off nid away. hoy anew ne fimiping dene, a 
redone, Chey eb it. One hotoad ity he pleresd htamell Giratghe din 
cheb, 

Agi he old worn fidbeed da har idiop, 

"Th wad ht bo dreniid tick nny nan dn day billed the verd fiaipdage- 
deer Get ran hy bere, tad bhi bate 1.” 

Ho Ken fie weak bo dni, he niw thy he nbob th from bedded fe billed 
he Nee epee line. We entered Mode dwellings. 

Here id dhe evant bie old wot wailed ba ond : 

Whe the ald wom opened tie dang, “Deemed ruly le Tahaan 
colunily ene) My dren patina]! 

"Phra yes a bilge fess ded whole,” he wade, 

Vhey boiled the wholes they youve ne big fen mad counted the Aud 
thing fie oyereniie bin mother li law, 

Then ho tone fou rows, Phen fe weal bo whore tly companions 
hi) fee died, Ele shob dake the nde, : 

“Away, nwiy, Wwayl Fordidl fer hittdag, you ly naeddant!’, 

Shey dated addl, mac agin he heh tebe dhe ade (ec repented bli 
words, jd the ollder vores bo hin feet aad. wo wll lay Ghee, Again 
hes hiok indo Wie nde; thes other pniped to hin foot Now dis who jumped 
Lo his feet, dena wae Maheli fila, 

“Ain Valive?! 

"Yen, Te yon wore wot adive, Te wotelel besten Cieh youd mee Galle bagel! 
hie aud, . 

"Healy, baa plot Donnidivet Daerah, burrab lt! hee pndd, - 

And wo now Matehibhiwia book home nn wor for ibinnelf, 

Hob wo very Jonge is die nner ntory whhah @dneve Madabed, > 


{i 


(16) Pine Root — ; 


Adam Kakewow a 
wid, 


ani hindylwin Ahvouh datelna waikintkton, natal plhuh unkluihh, 
dhawad hithmakdyiniw ant hdoiytdiw oalubme, ndtv babkth . 

hAtahtawd, “ hew, noalel, maktih kdt-otantutintytn adthi-heakud-nilpa 
Aen," Ft poland, 

‘“t hw , ” dik, ‘ , 

“ustin iotyok ntantahih, bit-atthtlal, " itm awa tedadiylndw onintne, 


K7 


dapied niquthiie midtapunied | dhwak pahkunda, 
haw, naka, nihackakwd-alpahaw kata, kit-otestutinigin,” - itd 
ANIL 

Mahal" tik, 

fikiwah hahhakiwe nipahdie ys pahhiundie, 

"haw, ponte, dine Kacwnataigan (ahtahindhee, avotyah adihtinhih, hed 
wiya bitdpamadhhan, "ik anion, 

alana," ita, " mahtih hakied-nipah puspaskiv ¢ nik-awahpih- 
fintu, idm, 

laped, waning, migiwanin amen b-dhodyin, hik-ahhihkamatin, dhutah 
anduahahhun awe aaiaty, pahpithahakan, ite datacid, 

Akal wnhtaw taatedhahhiand awa kind gins, 

"haw, néaial, hakied-naakednamahkan ahi tabiikahkwane, hit-apal- 
adhtayia, ' itih suninonid, > . . 

aha! ian, 

Hakim mahtih, wdaina, olah apih,” tik, 

peakatnlh! ¢ ql antndy apiia, 

"ha, aman hindwiwihitin } mankate ka-nakatahihun £? (th wanda 
onahlih, dosiad, pimiaind ¢ kityank aanehitaiaind, tik aacusionid, 

pah-potataik: ominiwd ubstpihtah miniod ilauragiwa, aapin mana 
aninhihh, ahah a-namahtaikweah pitihia rn Val uhlai, 

Wnpnind, amisl hik-dalphkasun, "ith ys ' wdlapro-iyin kik-dalahkaiun, 
dha wigan hitapamaibhkan wojyab,” ik aunuaanas  ahih taihahkwanah 
Kaka nemalinah,  diakwahtimahukanihh akiudtah niwih-takkupitiu okt ka- 
milyilaa, au nnd hah pihtain, tik annining » © dha olya kitapom aeiyah, 
abihtiakih, ” 

Haha’, nino," iw, 

Fir nanny kikway wib-hitapahtan fakwahtdin, swdiwdlinin witih- 
manihh whuhpah, Ahiahtaod pit-ntwapayiyie kilway, — padhtam y vwdid- 
hiatihmandw j. kuntah ka pd-pahpiwiht hdhtin, 

1 jyjimerah aki, iayihtane p  dvoe{enn’ k-vtlat yom, ” itdyihtaime 
poi jet-put- pathy. ; 
W hay, da din ab ah-na-nipal, aha ka-wi-kiltapemthgahh: katimatnan b" 


Md hi, 

 haihlaina miynaiwoak 2" idyihtam aw uikiarkio, 

—- Akin kahekitutibi, nandtuhh dy-itadid ; neni wah-hilutd. 

lpud kipakwatikuniw kiinnsnaw vwatapno-tyin "tik “uy, 
Aawdtan, nlayun 1) itediyton, 

potth kawi pd-parkwapiyhoa payah, payak keali-pahpryt 

“misawala aiodhiiuak, iiyihtan ; " polih nkedlapin iakwahldn 
dh," “h-itayilalil Oninendls non auiyak nke-wapaman," dy-itdyihe 
hah , ; 
nine paskihkudyiw, dyayaw dakwahtimnihh ayetayi 
hay, ab dlath awa dike dahenipat, dka ka-wib- vitapamiluyahh 1 dhe 
hodyll, hi-ati-pahpiyite ; 

purlkopuylo ; kahktyaw paspanktpayihtaw ohe wakapiyih, — dhaplail 
nipayll, ohih kachieumhborhut amnusoma naskiodlnan 7 pemcwitaw, priyih 
wien aylhukh ankoudu,  kabkigaw tuhkunwn ohih ka-kamuihtuwaht kit- 
alantudindl, mina wakpihtnah, mine likahkwanah, 


fr ytta sr st 


HDultlens potattkaw 7 ie blew," ox potaih : “the other blew on him” 


x HA 


aha hatahtawd eakahihan adhtauedh yy namiodta akin adhwaniyee 
Hah Ra oerperuhtagit papak wtih Chdy hay d? dskaw Gna wa- 
TAM MAA OER , 

"Hania daduahhainyla, witinene watapii-dgin bY ith,” 

“he fname niye ath la-Aeuiitematuhih aiethdauwin £ idyawaw 
aha te othtanawddk &fwphdawdiuiwdua 2? ltd wttiacuaah, 

aha) atagin, Mua vikan wihtamaw kilimualnaw kivihdwdin, itd 
TELE 
Nahe’, ada dabul Aiton Ghat Gila, © hedubabihbicmiapulh, | 
alintwihhaaun, heb-ankawinan, hts Chay ndudh 1 ida, 

dhiah vain, dendakioanieigih,  ullaameadaikahhwdn ys -aaaka- 
uhtaw, hulak atinane: pahpakahakan dkutah hikamubtaw.  dh-miadkani- 
wth pint, atah wakitailieu dh-pubhihtihkih untikwanthh, alta pikuh 
pa pavehtai, watihtahheh dau ha-ndiydyih, poli dyapita pad-witsiwdwah 
OTE ANTE, . 

"hay, maka ada ha-pahpabinatdpimaitanaw, atayine dd dliwah mdha 
erent bee wthyand 2" 

ay wenopa fd kipawdiw wvikon kika-vihtamawindwaw kivahyawini- 
tH, ‘ 

Saha’ f ndny ine ka-ndyah, dheituk dikah hd-aiakwdatimdwi-pinuh- 
tity) atintyibhaain, teh oe 

ahah ta-adukiwoaadh aahahihan tawakam nanuga kaskatin, dhutd kit 
dit awa cuikintkin, dha dh-ah-a'pwahidtath, mal-yotinegiw, — taihalk- 
mn dine ce Gakiaihde 2 dhaeah ranaluhtaiog dh-dla-yaliniyih, pa- 


\ 


punuldaie, — pafytak aichdaaoaks, 

hae } ' ; 

"hay, ahead pikuh kivttadhunae awe hitiauigstio | dhwah maka wiyaa- 
hute kd-wihinul, " , 

tha, aitiuenaidih, —udataugihtedaun, "dtd s adaa kiaiwdh Gia ka- 

wih, dhitah falh, hechfadkanitawy-hindwahh, ) aidiaiyihkdaun, animah 
cuit bean, os 

“ ithiuh nina naka, nitinetad § hdhe-iahk6tindn, 

mee deadpdhtd, daa uttaih-hindwaniyiw, — Utpiakdta dih-uhlith 
Mi pity dhe Tae kanakeaaild pa, . ; 

uh ably "hey, nélandann 2" pian itah dy-ayiniiidaih ak Takiwdwnts, 
hatiah dy atehtahhity 

potih, “hah, tanya hitinualano dyimaniyiw awihiioin ft kdydpite 
paged He nhant, 

"aha? 4 

rahi mika hiwdakahihanianawa nokiwanwa, ” 

ha, atin, adae taki wanhahitan ka-nokwahh, dhutah, § ha-nduah- 
tered prea htdo-b- aid-ubidaitdie, | uitiaiinhkaaun, " 

dhineh oh jukidiah atah vakutakawawa unin jatwdplnanioak olith ; 
dhwah authtdwak, lapinkote omind dh-nawaktaih, 
ea danted adhe wing Ght piydytatndkuattais dda-biakwdhkaniak- 
ead 7 - 

“hin, ndha, dhayih nanitae itodh - ha-piatal-wihdw kinahkdhhinin | 
autho Gui hd-tohanahh, taf hivoanhahikunihk (dwikinkamahku 1" 

ubunitah wvaaiaah kaxpahtakualyit’ dyeanihtdtath, dh-aadt-mohhitiuhe 
litnile fawihial nals wwaakahibaniniwahh, dhwah payswah, 


Vda ta probs 
da done! Mae Torte HG, I, 


bly this dniie doonioally-slededaipernnctirsl aymitor of the OUT aH 


- _ HO) 


_ hain nitarwdaimialtih, dhuld anak uhtapih, wuniptolath sain 
nithiakwdhbwaaiakin » rdthka-pa-platiahakan ninahahkin, Shed, a 
hawtatmdwak, dh-lpinkauik.  hihdty dhewdpaniqth, hay, kitahtawd hae 
pcp faterinut aon ndtukdaho ; mintahi Malwihkwaate £ pigink anahih= 
rated kaapiwdgini ls, ; ; oe! 

“hay, ulawaalminitih, ima ba-wthahikaniwik, dhuta ana helemialhitit 
anita ustikwdn dh-uttaryin dhwak uaiy, " dhodw awa natubkdario, “dhl 
Anchts dskah kd-poni-hiskwdhkwaatydn, wapahké iakeh dhenipahat nnahihe 
keane, deanda, 

G pdhtan awa bakintkiw, kilahtawd dhewdpaniyth, bikedpé aimoidhtiy, 
tstichikan dhoutinahk dhwah uaikahkodua walthtahh adkahikan, lwakein 
todd, artatahd Nedhi pd, 

deah, “ hdw, nimwée, pd-wayawi 1 kipdyoananilin: Gia baowithhiatas 
nico LP idan, 5 

hdtahtawd — ka~pé-thoatiyit demiathitigit anitikwahe — taikahhwdtdw : 
mipahdw, ualikwan utinam, wauyio mina ¢ kaedhtatiae,  yrhtukdwd pina, 

“dyakunt kd-wih-unlalt kékawiyioaw PER. © we 

nifitdie «aod ndtukdaco, “nipawdkaa ) dh-itwat . \ hdy, mitidand 
ulaw-daamihkuk ayaiyiniwak £ Ohi ta-mitatwal ; anihi minh keentpah- 
Tuaht ta-ndtdwak s taembwiiak {0 ao 

Hipiakdyoe daay mina; hawiaimdwak,  dhual day mina binkiwithhe 
waa awa vaeukaan, 

pauh dh-pdkupaydt, “takah atnahdhhim denipahat ukweakwidpayihdea 
domitarkitiyit, doakund d-nipakat anahdhkiiia, dhuyiluhhy daha btponie 
Makwdhkwaaiydn, d-niaiyiaaabienan, @ itwie,— 22 

fdpud dthiad pt huatah hd-pdhtakiwantyth, “ dwakwa 1 dheltwidyit 
auniyintioa, d-wayewl-bwdakiuhtit, pot Ohi hiepimi-diaak wd hutai nfy iin 
Ohi apal-médananh,  tatkahkwatdw ; nipahdiw 3; uaitthwan pileah utinam, 
pihtukdwedpriam, 

“dioahd anth kdewithenidalt eihdiwiyrwdaw 1) det, ' 

day mina midtow awe wolukdaie, _ ~~ 

“adlpawdbean dhemihtdtak, denipahiht 1" gaedw sp “het, nite mdlaitite, 
nitar-dnamithhate ayiaiyindwak 0" 

“aha,” dhedyiog. 

dhavah mowdwak Rutakak aylelylutioals, . 

dhiweh tiptakayho, daay mind Makwdibiwaalw awa ndtukiado, 

“hily, ntawdalniartih, Olah’ depimipayit wdwaakdado, dyalunie fakah 
ninahdhhition dhenipahal, uatihwen inka dh-milaiyan, dhagihadhe kaepant- 
Mahkwwdhhwaaiydn, ' itodw. 

Mikdadpa kdm~pdhtakk, “hah, namuya dhwah nka-nipahdw £" itdyihtam 
HEL WALLA (pee, , 

“ dwakwd wiwdakdaiw miamaskdla dourtackiale £7? kedtwdwwtht, wayawiw, 
pdyah pikuh watkdhkwdn atin,  latkdhkewitite, Ghepinitpahtdytt analy ilk 
aapin uaikdhkwan dhekikiakamiyil, kuvdw aw dakiniledw,  baldetyaw ain 
ulathdhkwanah, ulastutinah.  pimitinahodu.  patih daa mana itah dhe 
apiytt, piytak miltung uldkusiniyiw.  kah-kipa nahapiytwa, — kitahtawe 
hd-wdpahtahk dh-miywasiniyik sakdw.  waaakdm nipistyah ayayiwah. 
dhwoh ati-miapuntyio, , 

“a, namuya miscodds wahyaw la-nipiw. blah nka-nipan, nika-poh- 
a pdndn s rdkaskutawan,  dh-dldyihtakk, 


woe 1 


fo oe 
= 


minttht aakayio, piaiaih uaki-mdluaah dhutdwahk,  dhvwah  baydai- 
mintihwah, mayl-mitdaah dhatdiwank,  dhiwah pinaham, -d-kutawdl. ati 
dipinkagiw.: ‘ , - ; . 

hiniwak dak dh-talmandiit, S mihtih, mibuatmihtih, Ona nika-pondn, 
dy-dldyihtahh, wainban oe 

ania dhetitahk, (hdd 1" keddwdiylt Ghé mialikiwa, J 

pinihdw, rtaawila abdimihh, calvenn iaheutelio andakdw viplatgah nieakai- 
aiyah mind, nan wihen{paw, — utataht yrecaiiying deweal dhenvapuniyth, 
hitahtawd oldh ndmawan kikway ka-pdhtahh: aw dabinileiw,  kdtahtawd dh- 
itapit, ka-pd-path-pahkkiainiyit, utdaiyiwa bil asaaliycoa ; narmiwite ballin 
A 

“ahdhahidy, noha t wih-hewata‘oe and witha Lhd, hd, nohkea, 
dhutih anih apih,  wdwinkdaliw d-hitenawandtak, dekih-emdawak, ndadatee 
wahunannn, wapahhih uka-ntawi-nipahaw, nbhko, volyda kikaoniitain- 
anti, 

hedy, natalia, tation miitah dh-nihtdhkatdydn, aldh ka-wthihk, 
hull ey-inpitathhe, anpin ka-wdpinikawiydn, dh-waniainiydn 

ay da pud, nak, huchtwdhdahitn otdh ka-wihihk, wdpalhes, hi-nipahake 
sortwdinkdai, niwihonthuhtdn ¢ aid ka-kawatan, " 

dh-daknnamandio udatyeod, ina auanktaiiyhon dhetahhepitannntt 
mintah’ kitimakdylmidwo bhkunah, 

"a, nohhd, ntoth-nipan, kakiwd-ponamdae, " tdw Ghiamah, 

“hay, noulaimia, haukindydat, nike-pondn, " ddh hhuna, 

la pied nipaw aw bakinikin, nemuye deni pdt, d-wihewaydathal, " dwakdw 
cao nimanabimdlkan,  dheltiythtahh, . 

Aatahtawnd, “ nonind, nhawalnin 1" itth, ~ 

ahlal pik tipliakite dh-niptt, hhhee 2? dheitwdl aw aakinthiw, 

hitthtawd awa notuldaiw ka-wandakal, “nda -l mdtwdwanih nimiatibum 
nha-fahuha P" kedtodyit. 

dhwah- wtihtawdw,  dpahamiytoa 6ldle dads potth dhekankipitdiyels 
mah ley, 

utiy, namaydw fdipininikan dlaik dma)” ihediw awa notukdal, 

antaw,  kutale ath in dpabikew, eulah dheatinahk mankihkiy, “nda, 
dioaku £) kedtiodaplt, Aha mitte-mdnwahtan miaihaa ava notukdain, 
Ahapah ataakihdgy adahtitiw dhadah, 

“Qadth, dyakiw dtnile duce mialikwak: kebheantheakils 1) Ltda, 

dkwah ah antaima, aanin iatnam, d-wih-nimakwat th Gakinikiwa, 
neal ndniiodia unpltendy i, 

tad, wdindkund-miahhay 1! 

Henoalhneamiyiiod, wand meialat han, 

“ddd, ninja, tndukwah pitah | deay Kinihdlathin, ith 5 hel, noniad, 
fadakwuh ayiniginaw ta-nihlawikihitiw nikan Glih, youkthtak kit-dtinanwak, 


dikutah kit-oh-Madnak awanin® qwihedhytkitach, wiadah hit-Ghpikihak, — andthe | 


\ 


pahkininruhk nk-dtankdn, — nitukdaiw ndpawdlaw, dhoedlat ayintigcnin, 
wta-ldipwdiw, hd, dual, dated, adimalean, " 

nfnahwdiw Ghiamah Go ohlat mankihhig.e pt dwa ratatih dh-kinkipayit 
hih-nipatoiwo, dkunk mintihow awa ndtukdalo. 


ee 


Deep beeatling (aot seriig) fs taltated, 
> ECoshire te bonomefold of garment, . 
‘Infanta were (wid sometimes alll aro) kept ia the “noselag” whieh Ia filled wlth 
erably wood, 


a 


dhwah ohih, a,” hachiheitwdyit, “ana betah mendihtly aplianthin, " 
hedtodqut ohkwmnah, doakn utindn, sanchwdur mdudihwah, pot okt kiht: 
dyintwoah kihentpawiyiin ——, “er Se 
hohe 1) ihodyiwa s  nndatukapawin 1) ‘oylin, 
hdnewehs dhelnimenylt mintikwah wamahwdiw, — hedkale wapantyln 
kulakah mina. hiew, potih unkintkiwa hab-ntawiy ton, 
hie,” ido hi kihldyintwa, “ dheaya kildiniyuk's wanna abt obd 
aetatihvah an Ohtani Apimanilan kedtwdt nohhkin. ntwtentawlentpahaw aoa 
wmiodtakdaiw,  nika-witadhkiwak mitataht, minted ta pdlowaldiaik, wena 
nawalniydh, pimdtinlyanth, hdonmiudiplakakih nila lukwlitan, " Hw, 
dhe iti, . 
dhaoah duhtdw,  ahih wawdnkdalwak unaga wahyaw niplyiwa. —vuntlhe 
qt ain, kawdhtaldw, ha, wikiwahh dakohtalaw ¢ pubtukawdplnan, 
“dao dnd kikaolydeaw kacwih nate 1" , , 
mittowak Ohi aakintkiuktwak, okdwoiyiwdwu a -annwihkitaialh, — bethe 
tnindhawak deachatuihiniht, 
dhetipiakagit, kawinimoawal,  katahtawd aw ainininan hankdhtaant | 
kanpiodpindw witinaiah awa walapueiging  dhkual dh-pikapayit ae 
aailevodio, wihlan, 
\ “haydy, biliauninaw awa inkah anew waskahileants hes platlwantdy sh 
‘Mhutah plyakatipinkwah dle ayat, aleagihuhh ka pont-hokwahhwaniyan, ? 
dhodyiun, 
hd, ttehidw dhewtpartrphyelkuhidio, minaht aoduhahibaninihh ab 
puibuketel ohi mitten,  dhtipdukayih, dh-apit, nana hakway iskwahtin 
mintudatycod Ohi witalihwah, mintah?, harniyde, ay amano, pfytah moatlh 
Kya vaithtime, ntawrte hawininaw. 
“edltahtawd, “haw, ntantutin, hanonin 12? taw netatah demlalteilight 
aeunalt, . 
mittee kelyipi keawglaiw awa wipus atin) pole potatitw, 
“OC hanonda f! ketitin, 
day mind Kigipe deewalai, — deag adn ini, dha latuhtawi 
amalniyiod namug Akavah dino ¢ keatak ataakulina tine, 
“haw, nina, pawilrakd 1" id, 
dkwah awe Kahkakin hitow, dhe paspakamahithh on wanhahihan, 
miaiwd dhemtukwanioiryih,  kigipa kawatanw awe hahhakiw, 
" maakata nileakawalain, ? dtdydhtan awa wunbi nth 10. 
dhawah atucwala ainam udsikahhwan, Ahkamalaiylt oi hakkakbon, 
wine adathahhdn, tulad ahelnihahhewatahl, — mintah dabeutdinyii, 
mintahe kwdhkutdw oma taikahkwan,  ktyfpah antawiw, — kahhaktuw aon 
piminin, Ghefaewutait, dhwah tentak wlinan aleikahkwan 7 tng mdi 
tuikahkwatin ; daay min dyoka kavahkutio  nimtakotindw kahkakiwah, 
hdkals winaniygiw, deay adaa dataoio, hetek adinam ¢ dong mind bsikohe 
frwetans curd ; nicatald kewahkatdyi ulalhihkwin,  kdlahtewd autaolyin, 
dewoth-Antawiyih, windw wahpihtatiah panpankiwah > Akwah pakiniaimda, 
" emahukd, naphihta 1? itdw, 
ubindw utentutinah, «potato;  potih pimatiniyioah kahkakiwnh, 
und wayrnoak » polaldw ; polih pimatiniytod 


6 


' 


renee 


“probly ft hihtimih : “ho Inay.! 


we 


. ' , & 
dhwah ohih puspaskiwah © pamahukd "itd, 
Antuhtied awn patmainh in afin pahlaw pihinayihh, diay dh-titahh, 
ania deat ys uipin Paipin Panpin 2" pisinih dh-itddt, dhwah kahbakivw 
plinth AAA, ahah ana wan pikw tah dh-hawipayihut, 
nam Mihi Aheastaaiyih aalkahkwan, © diytodkda kil-dtih-huahhutiw 
amt nibihahhwin f adnan, nimandtiadn aaikahbwanah |" ited, 
nthih winapi ha-kitimahayl mikut, Aiwakind hiy-itdt, dhaoah kiyi pea 
nam kakway anh yahbayihh ; ayrikin hwikhhutio, dkwah awa paa- 
peakiw yakteagihk udatod inpaklaw, dy-usihtat vipin, nipiyah dh-ntutamiat, 
anim Hh-bannon pina, Akwuh haktitn hori pahk, mispod afikikinwah 
mplyah ¢ maneh yahtoryihk muhtiihh mininih whpikinwah, utithiminah, 
ay aioe panpakiw namuye kipihtuwda, pininike" uipin 1 dh-itudt, 
Akwoh mon napa wikinikiw hitayowinindw ; weusbekatdw oldh, dh-kink- 
mdi atinaue nauiiak, ah-miteit, miluni kianqviyiins pihtaayihh, 
v akwah th-hinihak, asay pisin fih-naknuait, © hely nlayim, , wlawih-way- 
aunudnin hinundnaw t kuutah winskaw kitastsibdutkanikuniw, * 
lukas pak fih-ulatuliil, ki-kituyiwa kahkakiwn, — plihtawdw ; 
minh pusphohiina, patth d-parpripit, hih-wd-monindyton, 
hd, witimued, nama bai hah-hiy-ananindn. ohi ka-witaiyion atdhi- 
mind 7? 
"Ay Hipiohuhh d-ntpayan, kiwis iakoh Hh-hiliiydh Shih minisah, dkauyi- 
heudh inkeah ka-panih-hankwahhwaniqan liplakahte, 
"nt, tha m ayhinahh ba-kilehh, willed {0 hectilent, 
hati, 
"tani maka, vita, binisi maka oe" 
Saphean anihi miniaah ulaliminah kitdyahkuh, dlayikuhh M-ponih- 


iakwahiwarth balimuninen, — f-ma-momindl niwdpumndw, if anfiha ta- 
atamath, atayiin, "iam, : 
 dulta wus, g 


haw, wbinunitik, pihtukih | iyikihh hiteyithu ahi, pinihtahhdh, 
ahuyihiuhhk Ka-unyaumanam, ? 

mibiahy ai yuod yi Manionk ikl hiskwihhiniskuiwak, dhwak momind mith, 
ayaa With bab-hitalwawi, akuld pimtpuhtam awa paspaskim, — kdéwih 
hikanenyinn wdhiningh, ptyish ok iokwawak ominl itepiwuk, ssn Mh 
hanprtnife, * 

hang mnitinnad, hinakiteihindn | apihtd-hanikik dkath daih kipiyah- 

hininan, — biveh anihintn, Mipwi niku-kiniwitisinindn, —apiniyiniwak uh- 
pikcihodal, * nipamativ dh-hinkudt inkawdiw,? itwdtei, kita-tapuiiw, hin, 
nimi, Kiylpah |S 

“th, ini-hypipuayihuk 1" idan, 

mayan Ah-figipayiladath, ray hith-atinvdwdlanwak, dh-htuhtdtsile 
Anak obnihihtalh muaty-ayak, 

Ahugibuhh ankwak dhayohkanin, 


"Oe “wad, polayliag? 


a . 
3 


This‘eld man and hia grandson, © youth, dwelt, the two, alone, inn 
tip, The old man was fond of his grandion, Te always hunted, 


Then at one time, “Now thon, my grandshild, Y think T shall try to 
kill some creature that you may use fora hat," ho said to hts grandson, 

“You,” anaworod the other, . 

“Por too much dood someone frighton me with the forebodiag that he 
will come upon you,” said the old inan to hin grandson, 

And so he killed a jaok-rabbits then he alinnod It. ; 

“Now then, my grandshild, T shall try to kill some oronture, that yeu 
may have another hat,” he told his grandson, 

Yeq,” answered he, 

Then he killed a raven; he skinned ib. 


“Now, my grandchild, when T hunt enoh day, should anyone come bo 
you, do not look at him,’ hin grandfather told him. oo, 

“Grandfather,” ho told him, “Please try to killa partridge; let me 
have av tobaceo-ponoh of if,"" he told him, 

“Tndead, my grandehild, what you say is right. [will help you, 
Put thin stone inside, and you have axlungeshot ghd,” he bold hin granduoti. 

mm ' i ¥ ! 

Phen the old man made a set of dirty, 

“Now, my grandohild, try to seize these darts on the rin, Ghat you 

vR i! ' : 


may uxe them,” his grandfather told him, 
“You,” ho said to hin, vo 
“And now, grandchild, sit over hore,” the other old him, 
Ho blew forth his breath: there Jay a stono, ” 


‘Ho, Tam leaving you too weak; porhaps somothing will overcome 
you!” his grandfather suid to him; “De, grvndehild, lie downs lie down 
flat. on your back,” his grandfather told him, 

Ne blew forth his broath more than ones: on all sides roots oliung 
fast, roots from way down under tho ground, until he wis firmly tied down 
by the roots, 

“My grandchild, this shall be your name,” ho told hing “Pine-Root- 
Man will be your name. Do not lool at anyone,” his grandfatdor told 
him; “Try to take with you these darts, Here to the stlok of the door 
flap 1 hall tio those things which I give you, and also your tobneco-poudh,” 
his grandfather told him; “Do not look at anyone that may come to you,” 

“You, grandfather,” he told him, 


Accordingly not at all would ho look at the door, Mo lay wrappod 
up, with his blanket over his head. Thon at one time somothing eume 
a-jingling.- He heard it; he wrappod up his head; ho heard someone come 
near to hin, gaily laughing. 

“These are women,” he thought; “These are the ones my grandfather 
meant,” he thought, ’ 

There, they came in, 

“Hay, and so there he sleepy, just the same, our swoothourt who will 
not look atousl” they said to him, ° 

“Suroly they mast be boaurtifull” thonght the young man, 

Thon they kept talking to him, saying all kinds of things; but he 


would not speak to them, 
*Trily, we are disdained by our sweothoart Pine. 
him; “Conn; orewitel”? they said, 
HUH ~7 ' t | 


(M4 
; Then, look you, one came bao, peeping in, while the other went 
Jaughing an her way, ‘ . 

“By thin tae they have departed,’ he thought; “Tuat let ome look at 
the doorway," he thought; “After all, LE shall not see anyone,” he.thought®- 

He uncovered hin hond, and eagerly looked at tha doorway, 

“Hey, and no he ia not asleep after all, the one whe will not look at 
unl" whe anid, aud off she woot, laughing, 

(Te lonpt to hin feet; he ripped through all those eedar-roota, Ag he 
danhed forth, he selged thorne tna which hid grandfather had made for 
him; he took then along, He did nothing but fellow them, He held in - 
hin hand all the things that had heen made for him to wear ag hoadgear, 
nud hin tohaeeo-pough, and the darta, 4 

Shin presently they enme toa lakes no land was visible there whither 
one Of hin nweethearta wan headed. “Hey, hoy!” they would shout now 
fv Chon, ns eu, Mey ; 

~~" What la your name, sweetheart, Pine-Root?" one asked him, 

“Hot twill not die the first to tell you my name! Firat you mut 
talh me your named” he told hin sweet honrt, 

“Hobe it! My alater-wife, dé you frat tall our sweetheart your name,” 
dhe told hor younger sidtor, 

"Yan Ax Car ax yon polnt of the Iand, np te yonder place, ‘Rain-of- 
Awly’ ii my name, You will follow us,” she told him; “There, be off!” 
the aid to the othera, .? ' 


Thon it was slippery ou the lea, Tle took one of his dartay he leaned 
on itu he walled.’ He doole another; he attached the alung-shot alub to” 
it, De walked noron the: expanda of jee, Though awla were falling on 
hia head, nevertheless he epi walling on, When they had reached that 
promontory, there, agaln thoy came and kept their sweetheart company. 

“Hoy, but surely we had our fun of him, my aistdrewifal But now it 
in hia ten bo mane binnelf |” 

“Ho, nol You first are to tell me your names,” 

“Very welll An fir ad yon point of the Jand, up to yonder place, 
Walks-Blown-on-the-feo,! in tuy name,” she told hin, 

And thon the wind wat to carry him along on the smooth ainfaee, ‘The 
Inde wan not frozen rhut da the middle, and thither the yeuth was to be 
hore by the wind. ‘Then, when ¢hey set out on their way, there came 
a great wind. Thea youth (ook a dance; he used It aka anne, Tn spite of 
the wil he opt walking. Atlant they reached the place, 

leva 

“Pfey, in spite of all, oar sweetheart jd keeping us companyt But 
vow hdd lily tae Lo nme hiaanelt,” 

“Vou, awoathents, EF hive (wo names,” he told them: “Aq fir is you 
dlowe-by point of the land, up ta yonder placa, (Hot.Water-Rain’ in ny 
name; an fiend you polit af ihe land.” 

“Bul now, sweetheart, be off; we will fallow you.” 

An Koon he started off, ab oues i began to rain, Like boiling wator, 


@ 


HO hat was the liquid, 

Thon those ‘women, “Hey, Tam being sealded!’ and they dodged 
hither and (hither, and enly with difliculty reached the goal, 

There, “Hoy, truly a dangerour thing is our awootheart’+ namel Once 


_ more lot hin nanie himself,” 


05 


“Ver, indeed!” ‘ 

“Rut now our little wooden houses are in sight.” 

“Why, aweathoart ming, aq far ag yor house that we see, up to that 
placa, 2 6 eee ee ee ee ee ee Ay rane,” 
bo ee ee ee ee ee ee ee thon thoy 

walked backwards, stooping over juat like thiq, | 
‘Woy, what in the matter.now with these little ones that make thom- > 
\ xolves look like prairie chiekenn?" ce 
. “Tay, mother, do not speak! “Before you know it, you will be apoak- 
\ ing your son-in-law’x mune! Tt iy his name, what we are doing until we 
bump into your house!” 
Thon, from.no one know where, was heard the ory of a child. Walling 
mekwards oe ee ee ee he ew we ew) thoy Inne 
agninat their little weoden house, ‘Chen they stopped. . 
“Hoy, my children, sit over thord with that man, make your hed over 
there; Tam too much given to sleepswalking; Lomight run into my son-in- 
Taw,” she sald, | , 
' Whon darknews foll, they wont/to bed, Whon it was almost daybroak, 
hey, there was the old woman crawling abouts a bad onHo of sleep-walking! 


At lant hor xon-in-law shoved het aside, 

“Woy, my children, that/lake over there, if I ate the head and the 
tail of the giant beaver that ia there,” sald that old woman, “then, my 
dream tella me, 1 should conse to walk in my sleep, if tomorrow my son- 
in-law would Kill it,” she said. . 

The youth heard that, Presently, when day broke, carly in the morn- 
ing ho set out, taldng an ax and hia darts, When ho reached tho take, in 
the ‘centre hea madd a hole in the ica, He made a great hole in the ica. 

_ Phen, “Now, O my grandfather, come forth! T have come to feod 
you that whose taste you xo love!” he anid. 

Presontly, there came with gaping mouth the giant beaver, [To threw 
hia dart at jt; he killed it. Ue took jt head and its tail; he took them 
home. He flung thom hite the house. 

“Tere are the things your mother wants to eat!" . 

The old woman wept, erying, “My dream guardian!” Toy, as it is 
destined, go feed them to mortal ment These things they will eat; and 
him who has been alain they will fetch; they will eat him!’ 

"Again night folly they went to bed, Then again the old woman watked 
in hor sleep, ; 

There, when. she awoke, “By my dream, if my son-in-law kills’ tho 
ginnt jumping-door, if my son-in-law kills him, that will be the end of my 
sloop-walling, if Tent ita head,” she aaid, 

Then really, in the morning, “Thera he goes!” the people's ary was 
hoard, “When he leaped out of the house, lo, that jumping-moose hid 
hounded past. He threw a dart rit it; he killed it; he took only its head, 
Ho flung it into the house, 

“Tove iq what your mothor wants to eat!” he called to them, 

Again the old woman wopt. 

“Yt is mourning my dream-spirit Fam, that has been killed!” she said; 
“So now, my ohildren, go feed if to mortal men!” 


“You,” they anid, 8 


06 


Thon the other poople ate it. 

Thon night fell, Again the old woman walked in her sleep. 

‘Tey, my clildren, the elk that runs by here, I dreamt that if my 
Bonsin-taw kills it, and T eat its hoad, thon [shall coase to walk in my sleep,” ’ 
sho said. ; ; 

In the morning, when ho heard this, “Oh, I shall not kill him now!” 
thought that Pine-Root-Man. ‘ 
} “Thero goos that olk that is so strangoly largo!” ho heard the poople 
ory, and wont outside. Ho took only ono dart. Ho throw tho dart at it, 
as it ran past, and off it wont with his dart in its belly. Tho youth went 
back. Ho took alt his lances and-his hoad-dressos. He pursued jt, Thera, 
> he kopt coming to whore it had stopped to rest. At last it was late in the 
‘afternoon, At frequent intervals it was stopping to rest. Presently he 
came to a ploasant grove of troes. Willows stood round about. It was 
beginning to snow. . 

“Oh, in any caso, it will dio not far away. I shall sloop here. I.shall 
keop up a fire; shall have a fire,” ho thought. 

Tt was a big grovo, all of young poplars, and of old trees, of black- 
poplars. Thon he cloared away the snow and mado a fire. It was getting 

* dark, ; eo 
gj te As a troe stood close by thoro, “Firowood, a log of poplar wood I~, 
~¢ahall put on my fire,” he thought, and started to take it, 

As ho did so, “Oh, oh!’ cried that tree. : 

Ho left it alono. Ho thought it better at the other side; at the othor 
side of the fire he mado his resting place of willow-boughs and grass. He 
could not sleep. There was a strong wind, and it snowed. Presently, there 
to’ the windward, tho youth heard somothing. When he looked in that 

_ . direction, there creme someone falling, Her leggings were gathered down 
© 7 *Sheys; sh®had not tied them up at all, a 
’ “Oh dear, oh dear! Grandmother! My poor grandmother will freeze 
to death! Come, come, grandmother, sit over there. I was chasing an 
olk which 1 had wounded and am tired from tramping through the decp 
snow, ‘Tomorrow I shall go kill it, grandmother. Wo shall have moat . 


fer wee 
: ot 


* to ont,” 
, ‘Alas, my dear grandchild, I am terribly starved; when they moved 
4 camp to whore the poople aro staying, they went off leaving me behind, 
arid now I have got lost.” 


“Never mind, grandmothor, I will take you back to whero they live, 
tomorrow, as soon as I have killed the elk. I will got some wood; you aro 
too cold.” . . 
He pullod up hor leggings for hor and tied up her moccasins. He 
treated his grandmother very kindly. ~_/ 
“Now, grandmother, I am going to sleep. Try to keep up the fire 
to warm yourself,” he told his grandmother. 
>» ‘: “Alas, my dear grandchild, [if 1am able, I shall put wood on the 
Are bi grandmother answored him, 
nd so the youth went to sleep, but ho did not really sleep, but only 
; meant to deceive hor, for ho thought, ‘This is none other than my mother- 
>. in-law. 


97 


Unhoeding, just as if ho were asleop, “Whhrr!” wont the youth. 

Prosontly that old woman rose from where sho lay, and, “Yah, as it 
is destined, I shall add him to my treos!” she said. 

He listened to hor. .Sho took something from here, and it turned out 
to bo some herbs tied in & packet. 

“Bah, this is not it! “Why, this is the rostorer!”’ said tho old woman. 

She put it down. From the same place she unfastened another 
taking anothor medicine, and, “Yah, this is it!’ she said. Thon tho old 
woman chowed a little twig. Thon sho rubbed some of the medicine on it.. 
' *augh, and this is the stuff with which I make trees!” she said. 

Thon sho hold it out at her grandson, meaning to touch the youth ~ 
with it. Ho caught her by tho arm. 

“Vaugh, you filthy beast!” ot 

He seized the stick sho was holding.’ - 

““Hoy, grandson, wait » moment! You have defeated me,” sho said 
to him; ‘Now, grandson, in futuro time mortal man will live in successive 
generations. They will gather crumbly wood. There I shall keep warm 
the child that is to grow up, so that I too shall have part in bringing him 
up. But in the place of tho setting sun I shall have my home. ‘I have 
dreamt of tho old woman,’ when a mortal being speaks thus, he will speak 
truly. So now, my grandson, touch me with it.” 

Ho touched his grandmother with that medicine. Lo, there stood a 
cleft troo. Thus that ol@Avoman turned into a tree. 7 

Then ho took that of which his grandmother had said, “Oh, this 
other medicine is the restorer,” this he took. Ie touched a tree with it. 
Lo and behold, there stood an aged man. ean 

“Whew!” he said; “I am weary of standing!” he said. . 


He touched with the stick a treo that stood close by. It was almost 
daybreak. Then another. Then, behold, there stood a young man. | 15 

“Well now,” ho said to the aged man, “do not be idle; .tanch these 
trecs with this which any grandmother called the restorer. I shall iro 
kill that clk. I shall take ton men with me, so that they can bring all of 
‘it, for you to ronst. If-T live, after two nights I shall arrive,” ho told him. 

“So be it,” the other answered him. 

Then he'wont there. The elk lay dead not far from there. He took 
the head. He took it home with him. He brought it to their house; he 
throw it into the doorway. 

“Fore is what your mother wanted to cat!” 

Tho young women were weeping, mourning for their mother. Dhey 
know with certainty that she had boen defeated. 

When darkness fell, they went to bed. -Presently the elder one began 
to walk in her sleep; Pine-Root shoved his sweetheart aside. When thus 
the woman awoke, she told hor dream. 

“Hoho, I dreamt that if our sweothcart hore stayed one night in that 
little wooden house that stands empty there, that would be the end of my, 
sleep-walking,” she said, 

He went thore at daybreak; ho gathered firewood, bringing a great 
many faggots into the little wooden house. When night came, and he sat | 
there, the doorway disappeared. The wooden walls wero unbroken. \\ It 

as vor i he-fire: te had burned up 
all his firewood. Te needs went to bed. ‘ ; 


“ 98 


Presently, “Come, my bat, warm me!’ he said to the very large 
rabbit. . , ‘ 

Very soon the rabbit was overcome by the cold. He took him up; 
hetkept breathing on him. 

“Warm mel’ L told you.” 

Again very quickly it was overcome by the cold. Again he took it up. 
Presently again it fell to the ground for cold. This time he did not take it 
up; he touk his other hat. 

“Come, my grandfather, beat out the walls of the house!” he told it. 

Then that raven croaked, as it beat the wooden house that was covered 
all over with ice. Quickly the raven was overcome by cold. 

“No doubt I shall freeze to death,” thought the youth. 

So now he needs took one of his darts, when that raven had succumbed 
to the cold. He took one of his darts, dnd threw it at the fire. There was 
a big fire. That dart blazed high. Quickly the flame subsided. The raven 
lay there, overcome by cold. Then he took another of his darts; again he 
threw his dart at it; this one, too, blazed up. He held the raven over the 
fire. It was near-dawn. Again the fire went out. He took another; 

‘again he threw a dart at the fire; his dart made a great blaze. Presently 
it ceased to flame. When it was about to go out, he took his tobacco- 
pouch made of a partridge; he threw it down. 

“Beat the walls of the house, my tobacco-pouch!”’ he said to it. 

He took up his hat. He breathed on it; there, the raven was alive. 
He took up the rabbit; he breathed on it; lo, it lived. 

Then to the partridge he said, “Beat out the house!’ 

Then soon that partridge set out, indoors there, doing like this, crying 
“Summer! Summer! Summer!” crying it incessantly; and at the same 
time the raven croaked without ceasing, and the rabbit threw itself down 
here, there, and everywhere. 

Before his dart ceased to flame, ‘‘A while longer let this my dart blaze 
high! My grandfather, I have come to the end of my darts!” he said. 

it was that far-off grandfather of his who had cared for him, whom 
he addressed. Then, at once, there was no more snow within the house; 
the fire blazed higher. Then that partridge flew everywhere inside there, 
sereating summer, calling for leaves, and serving its grandchild. Then when 
AMawn was at hand, the leaves everywhere sprang forth; and inside there 
on the ground berries grew up, strawberries. For that partridge did not 
cease from its call all the time it cried, “Summer!’”’ Then that man, 
that youth, took off his clothes; he was naked there, and sat reeling. He 
took berries and ate them. It was very hot inside there. 


Cr OS Se ne i 


One of them went there. Ass e came near, the raven called repeatedly. 
She heard it; also the partridge. There, when she peeped in, he was eating 


, berries from the bush. 


“Hey,. sweetheart, can you not give us some of those strawberries 
you are eating?” » 
_ “Yes, last night) when I slept, I dreamt that if you and your elder 
sister ate up all of these berries, then I should cease to walk in my sleep of 
nights.” 


\ 
\ 99 ; 

“Why, surely it will not be difficult to cat them all, sweetheart!” was, 
her answer to him. ‘ 

She went back. , 

“How now, my sister-fellow-wife, how now?” 

“If we eat up the few berries, strawberries, there, then our swectheart 
will cease to walk in his sleep. I saw him eating berries from the bush, 
and that is all we need to do, my sister-wife,’ she told the other. 

They. went there. 

“Como, my sweethearts, come in! When you cat these up, then stop. 
Then we shall go wut of here.” 

Those giddy wenches liked the idea. So then they ate berrics. When- 
ever they had in any place caten them up, thither the partridge would 
run. The berries would be back-on the stalk. At last those women sat 
like this, having overeaten. 

“Hey, sweetheart, you have defeated us! Push us headlong to the 
direction of the noon. You have defeated us. We promise to be good. 
When mortal men come into being, if one shall say, ‘ I have dreamt of a 
Giddy Woman,’ he will be telling the truth. Come, sweetheart, be quick!” 

“Well then, fling yourselves over!” he told them. 

Ag soon as they had flung themselves over, at once they went noising if 
yon way, going to a new abode after their defeat, the evil beings. 

That is the end of the sacred story. 


, gS 
(17) Clotkin 


Coming-Day 

ka-kisikdw-pithtukdw. . 

kitahtawd itah d-wikitsik awa mistanask uwikimdkanah sikdkwah, 
nama kikway utawdsimisah. awah sikdkuskwdw ustdsah wakaydsah dyimt- 
siyiwa, dh-kdsakdyit, kah-kiyipah dh-kitayit. umitsiwintwadwa. dkwah nama 
kdkway nihtah-nipahtaw awa wdakayés. dkwah awa mistanask mistahi 
nohidhkataw ; with-nipahdhkatusow. : 

émis ilwéw awa mistanask: “ nutukdsiw, ka-nipahdhkatusunanaw. 
nawals sipwihliyahk," itéw; “umist nik-itaw kistis'; maskéte with- 
pakitinikuyanku ta-sipwahtdyahk, dkusi pikuh ka-pmdtisindnaw. ” 

“ aha 

tipwd ntumdw wistdwah shi wakayésah. ; 

dh-pthtukdyit, “ahdéw, ta-tawaw |” itéw wistawah wakaydsah ; umis 
“dw: “nista, kitsisimitin; namuya ka-mitsisuyan kd-ntumilan. nama 
kékwoy nitaydn ta-mitstyan ; mdka émisi d-wihatitan, k-oh-nitumilan : 
ahdw, nista, kitimakihtawin ; kitimdkinawin. kikdkisimuldtin ; pakitinin ; 
nika-sipwahtan ; nika-nitundn ta-mitsiyahk. kisim awa ta-nipahahkatusow. 
piyis miskamanih ta-mitsiyahk, nipahakypawih mustuewak, nika-pd-kiwan, 
ta-pdtaydn wiyds,”’ itdw wistawah ; “usdm otah kisiwak nama kékway 
mustus,’’ itdw wistdwah, d-wih-waydsimat ; usdm dh-kitimahikut, dok6 
uhtst k-6-wih-sipwdhtat. ee 

“Ghat,” itwéw wakayds, “tipwd, nistd, ka-miywasin, nipahatsih 

mustus. anuhts nama kékway nimitsisun nista,” itwiw wakayés. 


1 We are not told what he will say. 


100 - 


(pwd miywdyihiam awa mistanask, dh-pakitdyimikut wistdwah. tapwd 
dkwah kawtstméwvak, dh-nipdtatk. dh-wdpahk, dh-kikisdpdydyik, wawdyiw 
awa mistanask, dhepitait. , 
dkwah dh-sipwihtitsik, dkwah’dmis-ttwdw awa mistanask: “ haw, 
' 6ma -kd-wi-sipwdhidydn, ta-mdyi-kisikdw ; fa-mispun 1” ttwdw. 

dkua d-sipwdhtdl, tapwd, numuya wa ryan: dh-thtat, dsay mispuniyiw, - 
namuya kisindyiw. pa-pimipitsiw kapd-kistk, piyisk nama kdkway mdsk- 
anaw um itah kd-pd-pimuhlal. piyis lipiskdiiw. ahtsi pikuh pa-pimuhtd- 
wak ; wipani-pimuhidwak uwikimdkanah.' dypku.minah kapd-kisik ah- 
pimuhtdlsik, dh-al-dtdkusiniyik, kd-wapamdt| mustuswah., 

“hd, .étukdsiw, dkus d-pimdtistyahk ; muatuswak 6ki nika-minahun, ”’ 
itwdw m-anask; “haw, Gma ké-sakék dkutah ntawi-kapdsih,”’ ildw 
uwikimdkanah, ' . . 

ékwah wiyah ituhtiw, ht. mustuawah  d-wih-kakwd-nipahdt. tapwd 
Gh-tsikahkwatdl, kahkiyaw nipahdw. miywdythtam d-wth-mdststhdt. dkwah 
poni-mispuniyiw. dkwah dh-wiyanthdtstk, dh-pdh-pahkwékiswateik, kahkt- 
yaw wiydsah uinamwak ; nama kikway wipinamwak. tsikdmad mistahi 
Ki-nohiahkatdwak. mistd miywdythtam! awa sikdkuskwaw, iyikuhk wiyds 
dh-wapahtahk, ‘““namuya nka-nipahahkatusunan,' ” dy-tayzhtahk, 

dkwah ndhah wakayés mistahi néhtdhkatiw. dkwah kagkdythtam Gka 
dh-takusiniyit wistdwah, “ mdskéts nipahdw mustuswah,” dh-ildythiahk. | 
tikwah néhtd-ntunawdw wistiwoh. “hd, mahtih nka-ntunawdw wiydh 
mistanask ; mdskéts nipahdw mustuswah,” itdyihtam 6 wdakayés, dkwah 
Gh-sipwihtdt, namuya wdpahtam itah dh-kih-pimuhtiyit ; isikémd kth- 
mispuniyiw ; wanihédw mistanaskwah. piyisk kdwih kitedw, dkd h-miska- 
wat uwistdwah. 

dékwah awah mistanask dsay mirah wdpamdéw mustuswah ; min dyokunt 
kahkiyaw nipahédw. min dybkuni kahkiyaw ulindwak ; nama kékway 
wépinamuwak. mistahi aydwak ka-mitsitstk. 

dkwah awah wdékayés sipwéhiéw,, dsay minah d-ntunawdt wistawah. 
piyis niswiw dh-nipdt, dkuyikuhk miskawdw mistanaskwah, mistah dh- 
aydyit mitsiwin, dkwah wiyah é-wth-nipahdhkatusutsik utawdsimisah uwiki- 
mdkanah, mistahi miywdyihtam d-miskawdt wistdwah. 

émis ttwdw: “hay hay hay ! dkwah kd-mitsisuydn, nistaw dh-utihtak, 
mistaht dh-aydt wiydsah,” itwdw awa wakayés. ~ . 

dkwah tapwd asamadw ; ma-milsisow ; iydta-pini-mitsisutsi, kiyspah 
nohtahkatéw, dkwah ch-kisitépuwtht, dh-asamtht, piyisk tipiskdyiw. namuya 
wih-nipdw, kapd-tipisk ch-mitsisut 6 wakayés. piyisk wdpaniyiw. 

“hahaw, nisté, kahkdwakwah ta-tahkupitam nisim, ka-kiwéhtatayan. 
mistaht néhtéhkatéwak kitihkwatimak, kimis mina,” itwdw. 

lipwa mistahi tahkupitam, ta-~nayahtamiyit. 

dkwah d-wih-kiwét awa wakayds, dmisi itiw: “hd, nista, kth-nisu- 
tiptskakdé nika-pdpitsin, ”’ itwdéw wakayas. 

dkust dh-kiwat. “ 

dkwah umist ttwaéw mistanask : “ dkusi thiik? anih ka-kitimahikuyahk’ 
minah, notukdsiw, kistds. haw, tahtuh dh-miywasikih kikahkdwakuma 
kalah. takuhtatwdwi, kahkiyaw tit-tinam kimitsiwininawa,” itéw uwtki- 
méakanah, & : 7 ‘ 


. 1 In monologue the Cree (like the Fox and the Menomini) use the first person plural 
in the exclusive form, as if addressing some being not involved in the act. 
* Probably read dtsik, 


4 


boo oth 


wef ep pte 
Ned ics 
vated 


101 


lépwdw hata a an h-walikkat pihtsdythk wikiwahk, dkutah dh- 
asiwatdt umitsiwinah. Ne 

dkwah awah wwilkaiyBe ka-Kiwat wapeni-pimuhtiw. dh-utakusiniyik, 
lakuhtdw uwikiwahk. mistaht pate ka-mitsryit tawdsimisah. mistaht 


miywaythtamiytwa. 7 
Omia itwdw:  mihtsdt. nipahdw ‘inadtanask mustuswah. kd-wadpahk 
kik-dspitsinénaw,. ” itwaiw; ay - L 


ad, miywdyihtamiyiwa ‘wantsin tare _kakats wapanih-milsisowak. iyi- 
kuhk Smah.ké-pdtawiht, kikdts kahkiyaw -kitawak, Gh-wapaniyik, wawdyi- 
wak, d-sipwihtatsik, dheituhtatsik, ohih mistanaskwah._ piyis tipiskayiw ~ 
d-pimuhtatsik ¢ “namuya nipdwak, . piyis wapaniyiw. dkwah dwakés kapd- 
Kisik pimuhtéwak,: Gh-ulakusik/ akwyikuhls takuhtéwak oh ijahk ch-wikiyit 
mistanaskwah. sa are awa _sikakuskwdw i ah ipl eh 


dh-kisih-tsimatdtsik ‘wikiwaw, “Gh, dstamittk, nitawdsimisitik, ndtahtan 
wiydsah, ’ itdw utawdsimisah. 

kahkiyaw sipwahtdwaok, dékwah awa sikdkuskwdw mistahi mdkwéyi- ¢. 
mow, dh-kiskdythtahk d-with-utinamiyit unimawiniwaw. 

“ ahd, nistah, pihtuka !” Gt dh-ttét awa mistanask, namuya lapypdihtam 
awa wakayas, 

kahkeyaw weydsah utinam., 

‘d, ntawdsimisitik, kiwdhtatak, ” itéw ulawésimisah. 

Ghu wiydsah a@watawak mistahi. kahkiyaw utinam, Gh-mastsi-kiwahtatat 

wiydsah. dkwah pihtukdw awa wakayés ; kahkiyaw ulinam umilsiwiniyiwa 


. mistanaskwah, kahkiyaw dh-maskamat. dkwah awa sikakuskwdw matow, 


déh-mawihkatahk, unimawinah dh-mihtdtahk. 

umis idw: “niwikimndkan, dkus dtsik ani hkd-nipahahkatusuyahk, ” 
tlwaw, pdskis dh-mdtut. 

“kiyam apd I" ttwiw awa mistanask ; ‘ aylsk kakdpdtisiw kistis, ” 
udw wwikimakanah. 

dkust mitunt nama kékway aydw ta-mitsit awa mistanask. . dkwah 
wdakayis mistahi ayaw mitsiwin; pisisik mitstsiwak awa wdkayés. pryis 
kinwés nama kdkway mitstw awa mistanask ; wih-nipahdhkatuséw piyisk. 
tydtah-wapamatsih mustuswah, namuya wth-nipahdw. . 

“ misawat kahkiyaw tit-dtindw awa wakayés, ntpahimakth,” déhatéyih- 

tahk, dk ohisi namuya wih-nipahaw. 

 piyis minah nohtéhkatéw awa wakayés, ah-kitat nimawinah.  kitah- 
tawé kd-wapamdt mustusweh. ituhtéw awa-wakayos. 

“ haw, nistah, mistanask ! hisiwak dtah ayawak mustuswak. minahdoh ; 
kinahtahkatananaw, ” itwéw. 

dékwah mistanask pasikow, Gh-ati-sipwahtat, dh-toikahkwdtat, kahki- 
yaw nipahdw. , 

lipwdw awa wakayos, “ nitawdsimisittk, mastsihéw kisisivaw ! dstam- 
wtik f pd-natamuk wiyds, ” itwdw, Gh-ati-sipwahtat. ; 

dsay awa mistanask péiyok dh-wiyinuwit ohi mrstuswah dkunth wih- 
uindw ; dkuytkuhk ka-takuhtat awa wakayds. 

“ tanahki, mistanask ?” 

“Gh, d-wih-ayawak, dh-umustusumiydn, d-wih-uwiydsimiydn. mistahi 
nnahtahkatanan, nista,”’ itwdw mistanask. 


102 


umta itwiw wdkayds : “ dydhtan dtukd kty-dwtydsimiyan déh-wiyinut!” 
tdw. 

“4G, maka kisim nohtdhkatéw, " itwéw. 

ld pw pikuh utindw awa wikayds dhi mistanaskwah, 4-sakipttundnat, 
ath-kwahtsiudpindl. 

“kiwa | nama kdkway kik-dydn wiyds,” ttdw mistanaskwah, 

kiwdw mistanask ; kustiw wakaydsah. kahkiyaw utinam wiydsah awa 
wakayos. dkwah éh-utdkusik, ituhidw awa sikékuskiwdw itah d-kih-wiyanth- 
takdwiht. wapahtam _mihkuh. dwakuh utinam ; kiwdhtatdw, dh-asiwatat 
utaskihkuhk, pahkih dwak6 déh-kisisahk mthku, Gh-mitsitsik awa mistanask. 

piyisk dh-tipiskayik, piyisk kawisiméwak.  dh-mdkwd-pimisihkck, 
nam dskw dh-nipatsik, kd-pdhtawdtsik awdsisah dh-matoyit. waniskaw 
awa sikékuskwéw, Gh-kutawalt, kd-wipamat awdsisah askihkuhk dh-asiwasé- - 
yit, dh-mdtoytt. utindw, Gh-kitimakinawat, “ kik-ayawanaw, " Gh-itat 
uwtkimdkanah. 

bmis twéw mistanack: “ namuya ka-kiw-uhpikihanaw. kdkway kd- 
pustayswinisat ? ta-nipahahkatusow, d-nohiéhkaltdyahk. kiydém waya- 
wiwdpin,” ttdw. " 

“ “ nka-kitimahaw, ” itwiw awa stkdkuskwdw. 

“ wayauiwdpin kiydm,” ttwdéw mistanask. 

Gkwah awa_sikdkuskwéw uisdmaw, ch-wayaurwapinat, “ tdpwd nikitim- 
ahaéw,” dh-ttwél. 

ka pa-pihtukatatsimuyit oh dwasisuh, “nutukdsiw, un; wayawi- 
wdpin,” n 
utindw away iskwéw, éh-wayawiwapindl, dh-ma-maw opi. 
éh-pd-pihtukéyit, Gh-pimuhtsdsiytt, “hd, nutukasio, ayawiwapin, ”’ 
ttwaw. co 

asa mina woyawiwdpindw. 

ké-pd-pihtukdyit ndpdstsah, ‘ ‘ éha, notukasiw, wayawiwe pin. ne 

dh-dta~ma-mawimuwit, wayawiwipindw. - 

kd-pé-pihtukdyit uskinikiwa mistah é-miyusixit,. Gh-wilisiyit, akusi 74 
waskwahtamihk d-nahapiyit,” d-musdskatdyit, ‘hah, ‘nutukasiw, kitakukpah 
awth ; t-akwanahow. ' ; 

ékusi dmisi itwdw awaw uskinikiw : “ nohta, *ataw Ght mistanaskwah, 
“ kitayan ist pahkdkinus, apihisatetbus-pahkabinus ?” 

“ aha’ , nka-ntundn. ’ Le. 

dkwah'nitunam; miskam. | my y 

“ hdw, 6m itah, ‘nikusis, ”" dtwdw mistanask, 

6mist totam ;: pahpawipaythtdw aw uskinikiw pahkakin. 

“miskutékay ta-wih-ihtakun !" itwéiw awaw uskinikiw. 

lapwd, miskulakay. pustasdkav. 

kayapits, “ 5 aah pakkékinus,” itwéw awa teakenitkany. 


lapwd, aaah 

Gkwah omis itwiw aw Oskinikiw, watéw-awasis: “ néhtah, mustus- 
waydnis, pahpakiwdwaydnis 1” 

utindw.. pahpawipaythdw awa uskinikiw.  - 

itwiw, ‘ta-wih-misdkisiw, tt-dtakuhpiyan, dskanak . ta~kikamutsik, 
minah waskasiyah ta-kikamuyit |” itwiw awa uskinikiw. 


103 , > 


lapwih kikamuyiwa dskanah mina waskasiyah, mustuswaskasiyah. 
dkus dkunih akwanahéw aw uskinikiw. . 
“ hd, nohéh, kMspin kitaydwadw nikikwaydnis, miyin. ” 
lapwdé nitunawdw awa mistanask ; miskawdw. : 
“ haw, itah, ntkusis,” itdw. 
utinam awd .uskinikiw ; pahpawtpayihéw. . ‘ 
2émis ttwaw: “ta-misiwdstw awah nikikwaydn, t-dtastutntydn 1” 
itwéw aw uskinikiw, “ dkusi, noéhtah, ntawi-kiskikahah ‘misdskwatwah 
ahtapahtik.! 
tipwih ntawi-kiskikaham awa™~ mistanask. mistaht miywdyihtam 
uskinikiwah dh-aydwat. dkwah, “ tan-tah awah dh-uhtuhtit ?” itéythtam 
awa mistanask, 6h ékusisah. namuya kiskdyihtam. askihkuhk kéa-kth- 
asiwatatsik mihkuh, dyuk ohtsi ayisiyiniwiw aw uskinikiw, usdm dh-kisiw- | 
asit, hth dh-kitimahimiht mistanaskwah. dkust aw uskinikiw 6mis istyih- 
kds6w: watédw-awdsis. tapiskots mihkuh kinwds dh-astdk maskawéw ; 
dku niydn, ‘“watéw” ntisiythkatanan. dkutah uhtsih aw uskinikiw ah- 
‘uhtisit, dkust wat6w-aydsis. * » _ 
. dkwah oh atgusisah usthidwak. piyisk wdpaniyiw-kahkiyaw éh-kisihtat- 
stk, dkwah nama kikway mitsiséwak. dh-apitsik kiksdpd, kd-pdtuhtat 
awah wakayés, umisitwéw: “ hd, nistah mistanask, minahuh oki mustus- ° 
wak, " itwéw. ‘s 
“dkust ‘mistanask | utinam éma tsikahkwan, dh-wayawit. wapaméw 
mustuswah. ituhtdw, d-wih-kakwd-nipahdt. ldpwd tsikahkwétdw ohi 
mustuswah ; kahkiyaw nipahiw. dkwah tinihih ch-wiyinuyit, dwakunih 
idhtapiw awa mistanask. ; 
“ mistah, aw dkwah niya niwih-aydwaw, ” téw wakaydsah. 
“ ayitd dtukd kiyah kiy-dydwat dh-wiyinut?” itwéw wakayos; “a, 
namuya, nistah 1” 
“ nistah, Gma nndhtahkatandn kisim 1” 
“a, namuya {”' ittwdw awa wakayés. 
makah aw uskinikiw paspdpiw, ah-kitapamat bhtdwiyah. kitahthwé 
k-otinahk méhkumaén awa wakayds, bhi mistanaskwah dh-pakamahwat 
ustikwaniyihk 6ta; tsikahkwéwdpahwaw ; ulindw uspituniyihk, wikiwdyihk 
dsiwdpinat. aw uskinikiw watsdw-awdsis kisiwdsiw, dhtawiyah dh-tsikahk- 
wawdpahumiht ; ati-wayawiw,. dh-ati-sipwihtat, bhtdwiyah d-ttuhidt. tsk . 
dy-ihtat, dkuyikuhk waniskdyiwah ohtawiyah ; ktpistanéhumdwah. dh- . 
wapamal awa wakayds oh éskinikiwah ah-pdtuhtayit, “yah yahah, nitihkwa, 
dkusi mana ntdtawaw dh-pa-pahpisihak kohtawiy, dtamihitsth, mihtedt 
népahdtst mustuswah |" . . 
6mis tlwdw awa mistanask, uskiwanihk uhisi mihkuh dh-wah-wapinahk : 
“ namuya Gh-pa-pahpisihiyan, nistah, mistahi dh-kwatakihiyan, nistah |” 
tsdmak aw oskinikiw pikiskwdw, “ tapwd mistahr kikitimahdw nohta- 
wiy 1 itéw, uhtsahisapiyah uhtsi dh-pakamahwat ohi wakayésah. 
mitunt taskivdpahwaéw, uspiskwanihk ota dh-akopayihuyit shidwiyah 
mistanaskwah, ah-kwaskipayihut. dasa minah émis isi mémawopayiyiwah 
wikayésah ; pd-moskisiak. dasa mina pakamahwaw ; laskiwadpahwdw 
mina, 
“ 4G, nuhtd, péyak dyokd utihtin 1” itéw shtdwiyah aw uskintkiw. 


1This sounds like “bow-tree” (ahtsapiy: “bow”). 


104 


mina wista napald utthtindw ; dh-mdh-maniswat, nipahdw. dkwah 
awah wakayés ulawdsimisah, ustisimdw awa pd-mdskistawdw 6h dskiniki- 
wah, | ‘ - 
. Omis twdw: | Mapwd kikitimahin, watedw-awdsis, nohtdwiy kd-nipa- 

hat,” ttwdw. 

dh-padpayiyit, aw uakinikiw pimwdw ; nipchdw. kutakah minah pd- 
moskisték; dkunih minah nipahdw, dh-pimwat. piyis kahkiyaw méskistak ; 
kahkiyaw mdstsihdw ohi wdékaydsah. miywiyihtam awa mistanask dh- 
mdlsthimiht, dh-kih-kitimahikut. mistahi dkwah aydw wiyds, dkutah uhts 
dkwah aw uskinikiw dh-mdh-mdatsit, dh-mdwatsihtamawdt Ghidwiyah mitst- 
win. 


mistah G-kih-ayadl, dmis itwdw: “a, nohtah, kika-nakatitin. 6tih 
nik-tituhian kd-wikihk,” itwiw awa watsdw-awdsis. . 

se wah { tha , . 
mthtatam awah mistanask d-wth-sipwahtdyit ukusisah, sdm dh-sdkihat. 
“ nohtah, namuya d-with-wdpinilan ; nika-takuhtén,” itwéw aw dakin- 
thiw. ; 
“Gha’ ,” “hmdw mistanask., 

tépwd pasikow, dh-utsimdt shtdwiyah dkwah ukdwiyah. dkus isi 
wayawiw, d-sipwahtét. mayaw éh-dkawdwét, winam atsusis, dh-pimutahk- 
wit, . 

“ G, nipisis dma, dkutah nika-nipawin | nakih ayisiyiniwak kd-wikitetk, 
dstam-itah dkutah nka-pahkisinin |” itwdw. ; 

lapwad dkuta pahkisin, dkutah utinam wipisis, dkust ituhtéw miki- 
wahpihk ; payak nodtukdsiwah mistahi dh-ktimdkisiyit, dh-pdyakuytt, 
dkutah pihtukéw. ; 

“ ay-apth, nésisimis |" itik. 

dyak dma ulénaw mistah d-Gyimisit wakayds dkutah dh-ukimdwit. 
né Gtawdsimisah, nisw iskwdwah, nisu ndpdwah. kispin dh-kiskayihtahk 
mustuswah népahimihtsth, kahkiyaw dh-utinahk wiyinwah awa wakayés ka- 
ukimdwit, dkwah mdkwats néhidhkatéwak, dkut dh-ay-aydt awa walsdw- 
awasis. namuya kiskdyithtam awa watsdw-awdsis. dh-wihkwdetdyikth 
mikiwahpah, tawdyihk dh-astéyik pihtukdhan. - . 

dkwah Omisi itik ohkumah awa watsdw-awdsis :  ndsisd, mistah mah 
Gh-nohtahkatéhk ; iydtah-natunawdtwawih mustuswah uskinikiwak, namuya 
miskaudwak ; namuya wapamdwak. dkusi aw Gkimaw, awiyah pihtukd- 
paythdyitsih mustuswah, utdnisah d-wih-iniydt, mistahi d-miyusitsik uskin- 
tkiskwdéwak.” dkusi Gmisttdw: “ makah iydtah-nipahimihtsih mustuswah, 
kahkiyaw wiyinwah dh-utinahk 6 wdkayés, itah kd-miywdsik wiyds dh- 
utinahk, namuy dwiya d-kihnipahtkut, dh-dyimisit.” — 

“hah haw, nohkoh, nika-ndtsipahan itsi,”’ itéw Shkumah. 

“Ghayah 1” ik; “namuya misawdts ch-miywdsik wiyds ka-kih- 
mitsindnaw,"' ch-tttkut dhkumah. 

piyisk kawisimowak. kiksipad dh-waniskét awah watsdw-awdsis, 
kéyapils nipdyiwah shkumah, dkus isi wayawiw, d-sipwdhtat, mustuswah 
d-ndtaét. wahyaw dh-aydt, mustusu-mdyah mawatsihtaw, d-ndh-ndwaydstat, 
umis ist, mustusu-mdyah. 

umis tiwdw: “ pasikok | pasikok ! pasikok J!" itwéw. 

pasikéyiwa mustuswah mihisdt. 

“ tsdskwa ! tsdskwa !” tléw. 


105 _ 


tuhidw ; wapamiw pdyak dhavinuwit; dwukunih mih-manipitam 
upiwayah, 

“haw, kika-kawahkatuaun," ildw ; “haw, uma ka-uth-kiwdhtahitakuk 
ka~pihtukdpayindwaw ahtukahanihk. kiyuh, ” ‘ildw, “namuya ka-pihtukan, 
Ot dst natimilkiathk kik-deidtuhtan. alimwak ka-mamawahkakwak ; min 
awdsisak ka-pdh-pimukwak. kunt ud ayaw nohkum wikih ; ka-wdpahtin ¢ ; 
dkutah iskwahtdmihk ka-nipahikwak awdsinak,” ttdw 6hi mustuswa, dkusi, 
“a, niydk dkwa ! pimipayik [" 

dkwah tapwd sipwipayiwak mustuswak, dkwah oud ndway d-pimipahtal, 

mustuswah ohih d-sihkitisahwat. dh-pén-dpihta-kistkdyik, takusinwak oki 
“mustuswak., dkwah awd mustus pdyak dh-kawdhkatausul, dwakd kunt tah 
ispayiw., dikua okt ayisiyiniwak dh-wipamatsik h-kawahkateusuytl, namuya 
protskdyimdwak, atimwak mdmawéhkawdwak, piyisk ndpdsisak d-pah- 
pimwilsik, awa nétukdsiw wikihk dy-ispayiyit. dkutah nipahik awdsisah 
awa mustus, 

awa nélukdstw mistahi miywdyihtam, “ dkwah wiyds nikah-aydn,” 
ah-ildyihtahk. 

dkwah awa waladweawinia Gkawdythk aydw ; namuya waipamik ayisiy- 
tniwah, “ lipiskoéts awdsis dh-kitimakisit, dh-mdydtistt, dkust nik-dsind- 
kusin 17 dh-itwit awah watsiw-awasis, 

dkhust kiwdw ; shkumah, déh-lakuhtat, mikwats winihtakdyiwah, 

" hay hay hay, néhké f ’ dkwah wiyds kik-ayindnaw |” itwdw. 

“ dha’ ," ittk shkumah. 

dkwah ndkih kutakak mustuswak, dkunth kahkiyaw nipahdwak ok 
ayisiyiniwak, mdka minah awa wd akayos kediyimisit. kahkiyaw étinam 
wiyinwah, dh-kitimahdt éwitedwakanah. dhkwah awah watsdw-awdsis dh- 
piltubalayit ohkumah wiyitsah, kahkiyaw pihtukaladyiwa., 

“nGhko, akwanahah kiwiydsimah !” dkwah awa notukdsiw d- hih- 
akwanahahk, “ néhko, ntawi-kiskatahah néwé nipisisah, " 

tipwd awa nétukdsiw nlawi-kiskataham ; pdtiw. ~ 

4 “ Gh, td, noaisd, ” itwdw, 
ma “ nohko, wayawth f wayawitimthk Gtah nipawih [” 

~ tipwd dkowah awa walséw-awdsis pah-pasastiham wiydsah, “ paskund, 
paskund 1" dh-ttwdl. 

ldpwd wiyindwiyiwa. 

“a, nohko, pihtukd ; dkwah pakahtakuhkd ; mitsisutan |” 

awa nétukdaiw dh-paskinahk uwiydsima, dh-wdpahtahk dh-wiyinu- 
wiyikih, kawiy akwanaham. 

“ nbsisé, nosisi ! namuya kik-dydndnaw ohi. kiskdyihtahkih aw 
bkimdw, ta~pd-ndtam, ” ttwéw. 

“g, NOhKS, mitstsutdn,°?’ itwdw. ; 

tapwih ékwah paminawasdw awa nétukéw, awa watsdw-awasis misi- 
waw dtinthk uma wiyin sinikuhtitaw, dh-tomisit. dkusi dkwah wayawiw. 

“nohkb, pansdwéh ; akulahkan kiwiyinuma. niwi-ntawi-ma-mdl- 
awan,” 

“ nésisd, kdsthah kiton {” 

“* asay, nbhk6 1” . 
dkus isi sipwihtdw, Ghi k-iyimisiyit wakaydsah dkuni skusisi yiwah 
Gh-ntawth-witsi-mdtawdmat. ké-wapamikut mistah ah-tomisit utonthk wat- 
Ghk minah, dkusi kiwdyiwah ‘ohi napdsisah, Gh-ntawi-vihtamawayit ohta- 


wiyiwa. 


106 


omiathodyiud ¢ “ néhtah, mintah dh-tomistt dtah aw awists kd-kitimak- 
taiyit Ghkumah 1” 

“wah, namuya 1" ilwdw wakeay oa ; s “nkthewdpamdw dh-kawdhkatusu- 
yil, ” ihwan. 

hus kiwdpahlaw aw walsdw-awdsis Ohkumah wikistythk. dh-apit 
gihtatyihk, kd-pl-paspiskwiyiyit Ohi napdsisah. wdpahtamiyiwah wiyin- 
wih, kiwdyiwah. . 

bmin iwityiwah Shkumah: “ nésisd, dla kikth-kitahamdin d-wih- 
ttuhtdyan,  kahkiyaw bhi ta-pdw-ulinam and wakayds,” itwdytwa. 

nihad napdsis atsimustawdw ohidwiyah, “ mistahi wiyinwah ayawak 
mina kdhkdwakwa éh-wiyindwiyikih, dkus idw. 

pasikow aw dkimdw, dh-ituhtat ; dh-yohtdnahk, dh-itdpit, kih-wdpah- 
tahle, 

“4, méstatibw-awdnis, nipa-nitin kéhkum ukdhkdwakumah, minah 
wiyinwah,? 

“ aha’ , ulinah, ” itdw. 

ulinamiyiwa kahkiyaw, d éh-maskamikutsik, ch-kiwahtataytt. mdluyiwa 
bhkuma G-mawikkdtamiyit uwiyinumiyiwa. 

bmis itdw: “ kiyam apd, nohké ; nika-ndlin kiwiyinuma,”’ itéw. 

“aka wiya, nosisd ; kika-nipahik, yo 

“namuya, nohk6 ; niwih-ndtin 1” 

kus Gli-pastkow, dh-ttuhtdt. ; 

dh-yohténahk, umis itwiw: “ maski-maskwah, npd-ndlan néhkum 
uwiyinuma, " 

“ aha’ , dha’, utinah,” 

pihtukiiw ; ; pastkoyiwa d-sakipitundnikut, ah-wayawiwepinikut, dsa 
mina pasikéw. pihtukdéw, “ nipd-ndlén néhkum uwityinuma,” dh-ttat. 

“et hi’ ! Ra t, 

dsay awah awa maski-maskwah ukusisah Gmist itwdyiwah : “ nohtah, 
dkdyd pisiskdyim ! nama uthkdts awiyak dkusi kitétak. dh-manitiwit 
dlukw dwa ! nitakis dtukw dwa ké-mantéwit ! kékdts awa pdskatay yapayiw, 
d-mistalaydt, ” 

d-uth-utinahk uwiyinuina, Ghkumah, deay minah ka-pasikéyit 6h 
bkimdwa. nawatinamwadw uspituniyiwa, Gh-ndh-natwanamwat oho wakay- 
Gsah ; mina uléniyiw tiwdpiskandpitdw. dkust nama: kakway 'eih-mit- 
siminamiyiwa, dkusi dkwah kahkiyaw Gwiyinumiyiwa ohkumah, ukahka- 
wakumiyiwa kiwdhtataw, aspin éh-ma-mawimuyit ohih wakaydeah, “ wah, 
wah |” éh-ttwéyit. 

pataw wikiwéhk. dkus dy-apiw ékwah. 

dkwah awa wakayés ukusisah Gmisiy ittk: ‘ dkust ka-kih-ttitdn, 
nohtah ; namuya kitdpwihtawin,” itik,- “haw, kakwah-iyinihkahisuh 
kispitunah mina kiton,” "tik. 

te aha’. 

ai-alah-th-kakowa-iyinihleahioud namuya kaskihtaw. piyisk with- 
nipiw, 

“ haw,” ittk ukusisah, “ha, nohta, nisimah bhi ’—6k oskinikiskwéwak 
— ar miyih, kaka-pimatsihik ta-wikimat, ” 

is 

a’ 

tépwid awa: nétukdsiw ituhtdw, ah-niawi-minat ulanisah bhi watsdw-- 

awdsisah. » 


107 


umisiy dw: “hdw, dyukunik nidnisak kimiyikawin, ka-kakwd- 
pimdlsihat kisdyiniw, ” itwdw. ‘ 

“ haha’ ,” itwéw watsdw-awdsts, “hd, nya, kiwd,” itdw Ohi notuk- 
dsiwah., 5 

tapwd ituhiiw. dh-pihlukdt, potih mistahi tiwatdyiwah. dkust dkwah 
sdskwdls uspiluniyiwah utinam, d-sinikunamawdt. kdwih miywdsiniyiwa. 
minah utiniyiw dwaku minah d-sinikunamwat, dkusi miyw-aydyiwa. dkusi 
Kiwdw Ohkumah wikiyihk ; dkutd aydw. piyis tipiskdyiw. dh-wdpaniyik + 
uhpimih mdnukdyiwa oh éskinikiskwiéwa. dh-kist-mdnukdyit, pd-nitumaw, 
ituhidw. dh-pihtukdt, sdmak wapamdw oh oskinikiskwdwa Gh-umisimadwiyit ; 
kiskdyihtam dh-pakwatikut, dh-windyimikut dydkunth. nahapfistawdw ; 
tahkih uhpimd ispayihuyiwa. namuya kisiwak witapimik, cdh-pakwatikut, 
piyisk dh-tinpiskayik, éh-kawisimutsik, namuya uth-akwanahik, usdm éh- 
maydtisit, Gh-itdyimikut. piyisk d-wih-kakwé-akwanahut, namuya tapwih- 
tak, piytsk dkus isi nipdyiwah. ékwah utanaskdniythk sikiw. dh-kiskdyih- 
tahk aw iskwiw, waniskdw. . 

“ yipdlsihdw nitandskdnah, ” ttwéw aw iskwdw. 

dkust utindw; kawisiméw aw iskwéw. d-wth-dta-kawlsimut awe 
watsow-awdsis, pakwdtik. ntawéts pastkow. Ohi kutakah usimimdwah 
Gkutah kawisiméw. dwakunth -akwanahuk ; namuya pakwétik. ptyisk 
Gh-nipdyit, dsa min dyakunth sikitdw. kiskdythtamiyiwa. 

waniskdyiwa, ‘‘tsdskwah, waniskd |” dh-itikut; “awa nika-utindw 
kd-sdpupét 1" ékusi itwdéyiwa. 

dkust utindyiwa kutakah, dh-ahdyit. dkust kawisimowak™ akwah 
akwanahik. dwakunih namuya pakwdtik ; kitimdkéyimik dwakuni. 

piyis wdpaniyiw. dh-waniskdtsik, kataépamatsth 6h omisimawa, kis- 
kéyihtam dh-pakwatikut. . 

6h Ssimimdwa ké-witapimdt minisah déh-usihidyit, éh-asamikut, wah- 
milsisutsih, umis itwiyiwa 6h dmisimawa: “ nisim, lapwad namuya kipak- 
waldw awiyak dh-winindkusit |" ch-ttwdytt. 

dkusi Gdk6 dh-tipiskak, dkwah &h-nipdtsik, Gmis itéw 6h Gwikimdkanah : 
“haw, kitapatsihun dké kd-pakwasiyan,” tdéw; ‘“namuya dkust ta- 
isindkusiyan 6ma kd-wipamiyan dsindkusiyadn. kd-wdpahk nika-ndtéwak 
mustuswak. wihtamawahkan kohtawiy aka \wiyah ka-kitimahdt ayisiyini- 
wah; kay dkwah dkusi tit-Gtinam wiyinwahy dkusi itahkan. haw, pést- 
wakwawi mustuswak, nika-pd-nikdnuhtan, pahkékin ntk-éskutdkan ; dkuté- 
wahk nik-dtdsin; dkwah mustuswaydn nik-gkwanahun ; dskanak ta- 
_kikaméwak minah waskasiyak. minah nikikwaydn nik-dtastutinin. niy 
dwaké. nika-pihtukdn pihtukahanihk. . nik-askokwak mustuswak. wask- 
wahtdmthk .uhtst nika-kihtsékusipayihun; dkuléh\ nik-dkusin. kika-pdy- 
ituhtan:; minisipuy ko-pdtén. dkuté ka-mitsindnaw ; ka-nisu-mitsisun- 
dnaw. kispin kitayan éh-miywasikih kitayowinisah, dwakunih kika~pustayo- 
winisdn, wih-pdy-ttuhidyini,”’ itéw uwikimakanah.~~_ . 

dkusi nipawak. dh-mdékwa-nipat aw uskinikiskwaw, Kitahtawd paéku- 
payiw. namwats nipdyiwa undpéma, dsay d-sipwahidyit, thendlayit mus- 
tuswah. kiyipa wapaniyiw. dkusi é-kih-waniskaisik, uumisah~achih-mit- 
sisutsik, wayawiw, bhidwiyah dh-ituhiét. — 

émisiy itéw : “ nohtah, aspin kiksdp d-sipwahtdt kinahahkisim.” a 

_ “Gh yahaw, nlanis, tandhkih dka kd-kitahamawat? ta-kawatsiw nnah- ~~~ 

ahkisim, ” ttwdw. . 


’ 


“gmint makah kitth kinahahkistn, ndhiah > ‘ pdsiwakwawi mustuswak, 
dhaya kd-totahk, k-dtinahk wiyinwah,| bhi utiyintmah kd-maskamat wiyinwa, ’ 
kitik Kinahdhkistm, ta-wihtaman tyit-Gsawdpamdtsik mustuswah.  éhusi 
kithetwdw kinahdhkisim, " 

“aha’ , nidnis, nika-ponihidn ; k-dtwdt nnahahkisim nka-tolin. " 

dkust kiwdw aw uskinikiskwdw, 

dkusi wayauiw awa kisdyiniw, mis dh-itwdt : “ uskinikitik, asawédpik. 
kayds kiksdp dsah kt-sipwdhtiw ninahdhkisim, dh-ndtdt mustuswah,”’ dh- 
ttwdl awa kisdyiniw. 

dkust ldpwiw kapd-kisth ay-asawdpiwak ok Gskinikiwak, dh-pdn~ 
dpihté-kisikdyik, kd-pdpaytyit mustuswah. sdsay aw uskinikiskwdw minisah 
histsam,~ mdskéls takuhtdtsth,” dy-ildyimat undpdéma. potih kistwak 
dh-pdy-thtdyit, uskinikiwak oki kd-wipamdtsik mistah dh-miyusiyit uskiniki- 
wah, nikdn dh-pd-pimipahdyit mustusweh, dh-askékuyit. namwats nistta- 
wiyimdwak oh Oskintkiwah. simak pihtukdw uma pihiukahan ; 
dkutah Ghisi wéskwahtdmth kihtsdkusipaythéw dw uskinikiw; d&kuytkuhk 
dkwah pihtukdpayiyiwa bhi mustuswah. simak ké-wapamat ah-miyusiyit 
uskinikiwah ; dwakunih unépdmah. sdmak wasakam whtsr kihtsékustwak 
uskinikiwak tskwdwak minah, d-wih-waépamdtsik bhi mustuswadh, dkust 
dkwah th-péh-paskiswatsik shi mustuswah, aw dskinikiskwdw minisah 
wiydkanthk d-kth-astét, kd-ntaw-asamdt uvikimdkanah. wdpaméw awa 
umisimadw kd-kih-pakwélat ; dkwah miywdyiméw dh-miyusiyit, dh-wap- 
amit dsay usima kd-la-kihtsdkustyst, d-wih-miydyit oht mdnisah, “nah aha 
ulinah,’”’ dh-itdytt. Odtinam aw éakintkiw, kahkiyaw awiyah miywayimik 
aw oOskinikiw. dkust dkwah hiwdpahtdw awa émistmadw ké-kith-pakwaldt. 

bmisi tldw ukdwiyah ; “ ndkdh, paladh minisah 1". e 

miyik. dkwah Meisam. namuya mistahi kisisam, “ kaka kd-pa-kiwat 
nndpdmindn, ” dy~itiythtahk, usim dh-miywiyihtahk. dh-wapamat usimah 
dh-witsi-milsisdmayit, “nist dkutd nika-milstsun,” dh-ildyihtahk, tdpwd 
sipwihtaldw umdnisimah, dh-takuhtatat. 

* nah oh Gtinah," ttéiw. : ; ‘ 

aw uskinikiw Gmisiy itdw: “ pé-imatsiwdéhtatah,” idéw shi ké-kih- 
pakwatikut. eo ot 

lapwéh Gmatsiwéw aw iskwdw, mwéhtsth tstki dh-aydt, kd-sdskuskawéat 
mistikwah ; nihisipayiw ; stkipayiyiw umdnisipém ; usit napatd mit- 
simotéw ; kusdwikutsin. kahkiyaw awiyak mistaht pahpiwak, iskwdwak, 
awdsisak, piyisk matow aw uskinikiskwiw, dh-ndpdwisit, d-nihtsipaytt. 
akusty ist dh-pihkuhut. kiwdw, éh-mdtut. dkwah oki, dsay kahkiyaw ah- 
nipahimiht mustuswah, kiwdw awah watsdw-awasis. 

d-pihtukdtstk wikiwahk, awa ké-kih-pakwatat, “ nisim, nistah pdyak 
umaskisin nika-kikamuhtdwan ; nika-pustaskisinahdw napatéh,” dh-ttwat ; 
“nambwya 1” ttwéw aw uskinikiw, . 7 

wist dkwah pakwéldw, é-kith~pakwilikut 6h misimawa. dkusi ay-aydwak 
dkutah: pisisik matow awa émisimaéw, ah-népdwisit, &-kih-nthtsipaytt. 
papimuhtéw tahkih. piyisk, “tandhkih?"' dh-itikut nandtuhk awiyah, 
“ tandhki k-bh+mdtuyan ?” 

“ éh-népdwihit wats6w-awdsis, éh-pakwasit," dkusi dh-ttwit. 

“a nosisd, kahkiyaw awiyah kitimakdyimik watséw-awdsis," éh-~itiht 
aw iskwaéw, tahkih dh-papdh-matut. 

kitahtawd pdyak notukdsiwah ka-wapamal, “ tandhkih, nésisim, pistsik 
ad-mdtuyan ?” dh~itikut. 


109 ' 


“ dh-ndpdwihit watadw-awdsts,7' dh-ttdt. 

“Gh, tsdskwah, nistah ta-ndpdwistt nka-titawdw, ” idw-awa notukdsiw. 

Kitaktawd dh-papdmuhtil awa watsdw-awdasts, apisis stptsis kd-wanah- 
tahk. dkutéh ttuhtiw akdmihk aw oskintkiw kd-miyusit. 

ah-ati-kiwét, hd-wapamdt nétukdstwa, “néstsih, naydmin; nama 
nikth-dséwahdn, ” ch-itwéyit. 

““@ nohké, dsukanis nik-dsthtan, ta~pimuhléyan, ” 

“ nosisd, nika-pakaslawaipayin, "' ttwdw 6 notukdsiw. 

piyisk, “dha,” ildw.— 

nayomdw, dh-dsuwahohdt. 

“hd, nohké, dhutah dkwoah,” dh-ildt, namuya wi-nihtakusiw awa 
nétukdsiw. ; 

d-wih-kakwd-pahkwatindl ohi nitukdsiwah, nama kih-pihkuhaw ; tapis- 
kéts piwdpisk uspituniyiwa uskiliyiwah mina, dkwah namuya wih-kiwdw, 
d-nipdwisit, nétukdsiweh ah-naydmal. piyisk omisi btah wik-kipthkitun- 
anik, piyisk kiwaw. ‘ 

dh-waépamat aw dmisimdw, mistaht pahpiw, “ tandhki ukistéyimuh 
watséw-awasis, ndtukdsiwah kd-pah-nayomat ?” éh-ttwdt. 

aw éskinikiskwdiw dh-wapamdt unadpdmah, mistahd pakwitaw. dh-dta- 
pokamahwal, namuya kih-nipahdw. kahkiyaw ayisiyiniwak dh-dia-paka- 
mahivdtsik, namuya kih-nipahdwak ohi notukdsiwah. piyisk wth-nipiw awa 
watsow-awdsis. piyisk Omisi tdlam, dmisi, dkd d-kih-pikiskwét. dkwah 
watéwah dyakuni dh-mdwatsihimiht, dkutah éh-kawipayihut. awa notukdsiw 
Shi watéwah dkunih pikoh mitsimindw. awa wiya watsdw-awasis uhpimé 
uhisth pasikow. . 

awa nétukdsiw dmisiy itwiw: “ nodsisé, kiyam nika-pimatisin [” 
ttwaw. 

“ dha’ ,” itwdw watsiw-awdsis. 

dkust ulindw oki nétukdwah, usitiythk d-milsimindl. 

Smis ttwéw: “hd, notukisiw, tsiskwah Gtéh nikdn ayistyintwak tt- 
dydwak ; Omisi tit-dtwiwak, —pakamisiméw ; usit piké umah ndkwaniyrw 
“awa nétukésiw,— ‘ kohlohkd-wiyaman'’ tit-dtwdwak [” 

“ Gstam 1? itéw Ohi kha-kih-pakwdtikut tskwawah./ 

Gh-dta-mdluyil, utindw ; mistik dh-tsimasuyit, dkutah pakamisimaw. 

; “ akutah kiyah ka-kikamun ; ‘ wasaskwélow-’-lik-dtikwak ayisiyiniwak. 

“nama nantaw biksdldpatisin ; usdém kikisidyimun — hd, dslamitik kahkiyaw 
ayisiyiniltk | kaw, nimandtsimakan, kiyah kitawdsimisak kiwikimakan, 4, 
sipwahidk ! -niyak ! kiyawdw 6tdh nikan ayisiyiniwak ‘wdkaydsak' k- 
dsiyihkattkhowawak, —~ dkwah kiyawaw, ”— kutakah, —“ kiyawaw mahithkan- 
ak, dkwah kutakak kiyawdw mahkdsisak, dkwah kutakak kiyawaw pisiwak, 
kiyawaw kihkwahékdsak !” 

ékusi kahkiyaw pisiskiwah dkwah usihdw. dkwah sipwéhtéw ; kiwéw ; 
uwikimakanah minah witséwiw. nistwdw dh-nipdisik, utihtéaw ohtawiyah 
mistanaskwah. miywéyihtom awa mistanask dh-utihtikut ukusisah. 

dkusi péyak tipiskiw, dkutah dh-aydt, Omisiy ttdw: “ ha, nohtah, 
usim Riki meig-pim ha, kiyah otéh ntkan ayisiyiniwak ‘ mistanask ’ 
kit-dtwdwak dyakunik/ afistyiniwak. kika-mowikwak, usdm d-kih-miyu- 
pimatisiyan. — dkwdh kiyah,”— ukawiyah, —“ ‘sikak’ kit-dtwéwak ; mis- 


11 do not know what this substance is. . C 
8a18e~8.-° 


110 


tahi ka-miyu-pimdtisin ; nama wihkdts ka-tahkwamawak ayisiyiniwak. 
ha, niya ! ‘ winisuydsis’ kik-dtikwak aytsiyiniwak ; kika-méwikwak.” 


stipwahtaw. 

“akwah niyah waidw ; mihkuh uma, watdw niyah. dkust dkwah, nama 
kdkway.”” aa 

dkust dkwah nama kdkway dtsimuwin. dkuytkuhk dh-iskwak ataydh- 
kdwin. 


» 


Once upon a time there dwelt somewhere Badger and his wife, Skunk, 

. and they had no children at all. This Skunk-Woman’s elder brother was 

Grizzly, and he was a terrible glutton, who always in a jiffy ate up all their 

food. And this Grizzly was not good at killing anything. So Badger 
went hungry much of the time; he nearly starved to death. 

This is what Badger said: “Wife, we shall be starving to death. We 
had better go away from here,” he said to her; “I shall tell your brother 
80; perhaps he will be willing to let us go. Only i in this way can we stay 
alive.’ 

“Yes, do that!” 

So he called his brother-in-law, Grizzly. 


When he came into the tent, “Good, come in!” said he to his brother- 
in-law, Grizzly; thus he spoke to him: ‘“Brother-in-law, I am disappoint- 
ing you; it is not to a meal that I am calling you. I have nothing to eat; 
it is only to tell you something, that I have called you: now, brother-in- 
ov hear me with pity; take pity on my plight. I beg this of you; let me 

; Jet me go away from here; let me look for something to eat. Your 
“Boter here is almost.dead from hunger. If, in time, I find something for 
us to eat, if I kill some buffalo, I shall come back here and bring meat,’ 
he told his brother-in-law; ‘for hereabouts:there are no buffalo at all,” 
he told his brother-in-law, meaning to deceive him; because the other too 
cruelly abused him, was why he wished to go away. 

— “Very well,” said Grizzly; ‘Indeed, brother-in-law, it will be well 
if you kill a buffalo. At present I too have nothing: to eat,”’ said Grizzly. 


By na en a Be 


So then they went to bed and slept. In the morning, at early day, Badger 
made ready to move camp. * 


Then, as they set out, then ‘Badger spoke. thus: ‘Now then, when I 
set out, let there be foul weather; let it snow!” he spoke. | 

So when he departed, really, he had not gone far, and already it was 
snowing. It was not cold. He went along with his camp all day, until 
there was no trail at all in the place where he marched. At last night 
came. Still they marched on; they tramped on till dawn, he and his wife. 
When they had marched all of that day; too, as evening came on, he saw 
some buffalo. 

“There, old woman, now we can live; I shall make a killing of these 
buffalo, ” said Badger; “There, go camp over in that grove,” ‘he told his 
wife 

And he went to try and kill the buffalo. Indeed he threw his spear 
at them and killed them all. He was glad when he saw that he was going 
to get all of them. Then it stopped snowing. Then-they cleaned them 
and took off the hides and took all the flesh; they wasted none of it. No 


Truly, glad was Badger that. his. brother-in-law gave’ hiny’ leave to" #6. * 


one 


we 


aA 


111 


wonder, for they had suffered much from hunger. Sluunk-Woman,-was 


See 


happy to sce so much meat, thinking that, ‘Now we shall not starve.” 

Then that Grizzly in yonder place got very hungry. He grew restless 
when his brother-in-law failed to arrive, thinking, ‘‘No doubt he has 
killed buffalo."’ He wanted to look for his brother-in-law. ‘Ho, suppose I 
go look for Badger; no doubt he has killed buffalo,” thought Grizzly, and 
went forth. He could not see where the other had gone by; for, of course, 
it had snowed; he lost Badger’s trail. At last he went back home, unable 
to find his brother-in-law. ; 

Then that Badger again saw some buffalo; ‘these too he killed, all 


' of them. These, too, they took entirely; they threw nothing away.. They 


had much to eat. 

Then Grizzly set out to look again for his brother-in-law. At last, 
after, two nights on the road, he found Badger, found him in possession 
of much food, while he and his wife and children were starving. He was 
very glad to have found his brother-in-law. , 
He cried, “Splendid! Now I shall eat, now. that I have come to my 
brother-in-law, who has so much meat,” said Grizzly. 

And so, really, he was given food; he ate and ate; even though he 
finished meal after meal, right off he was hungry again. So, as he was 
cooked for and served, night came on. He felt no need of sleep, but ate 
all through the night, that,Grizzly. At last day broke. 

“Hoho, brother-in-law, let my sister tie up dried meat for 'me to take 
home. Your nephews are very hungry and your sister,’ he said. 

So she tied up a great amount of it, for him to carry on his back. 

Then, when Grizzly was ready to go home, he spoke: “‘Now, brother- 


in-law, two. nights from now I shall move my camp to this place,” said 


Grizzly. 5 ja 0 ° 
So then’he went home. 

. Then thus.spoke Badger: “So it is in this way that your brother will 
again reduce-tis to misery, wife. Now, do you hide the best of your dried- 
meats. When they come here, he will take away all our supplies of food,” 
he said to his wife. 


“~"<"A'céordiigly, she hid some, digging a pit within the tent and putting ~ 


in her store of food. 


And that Grizzly, going home, marched all night. In the evening he 
arrived at hiscamp. He brought a great deal for his children to eat. They 
were very glad. ; “ 

This is what he said: ‘Badger has killed many buffalo. Tomorrow 
morning we shall move camp to that place,” he’ said. », 

Very glad were his children. They ate almost till dawn. As much 


as this was, which had been brought for them, they devoured nearly all of 


it. The next morning they made ready and set out to go to Badger’s. 
Night fell while they were on the march; they did not stop to sleep. Day 


_broke. All that day, too, they marched. In the evening they arrived 


there where Badger was camping. Skunk-Woman beforehand had cleared 
away the snow where she planned for her brother to camp, off to one side 


in a grove, off where he was to go and camp. Although Skunk-Woman . 


said, ‘Over here!’’ to her brother, that Grizzly paid no heed, but camped 
right there. 
83186—8} 


412, 


When they had set up their tent, “Now, come here, children, let us 
fetch meat,” he told his children. ~ 
They all went forth. Then that Skunk-Woman felt very sad, when 
she knew that he was going to take their food-supplies. 
“Well, brother-in-law, come in!” said Badger, in vain, to him, but 
Grizzly paid no heed. 
He took all the meat. 
“Come, children, bring it home,” he bade his children. ‘ 
‘ They carried off the meat in great quantity. He took all, carrying 
1. “home the meat to the last bit. Then Grizzly went inside the tent; he 
orctook. all of Badger’s food supplies, robbing him of all. And Skunk-Woman 
gried, " grieving for it, larnenting Wer store of food. 
dee She said, ‘Husband, and so we are to starve to death,” she said, 


t 


pi 
‘ See ay #till where you are!” said Badger; ‘‘Your brother is incorrigible, a 
andsthat is the end of it,” he told his wife. : 
And so Badger had absolutely nothing to eat. And Grizzly -and his 
household did nothing but eat. At last Badger had eaten nothing for a 
long time; at last he was almost dead from hunger. “Although he would 
see buffalo, he did not care to kill them. 
“In any case that Grizzly will take them all, if I kill any,” he thought, 
and that was why he did not care to kill them. 
At last Grizzly also was hungry, when he had eaten up the supplies. 
Then once he saw some buffaloes. Grizzly went there. ; 
“Listen, brother-in-law, Badger! Close by here are some buffaloes. 
Make a killing, we are all hungry,” he said. 
Then Badger rose to his feet and went out to spear them. He killed ce 
them all. 
Grizzly hallooed, “Children, your uncle has got them all! _ Come hore! 
Come fetch the meat, ” he eried, and started out. 
By this time Badger was on the point of taking one of those buffaloes, 
a fat one; just then up came Grizzly. 
“What is the idea, Badger?” co 
“Why, I wanted it, seeing that I have some buffaloes, I wanted to 
‘ have some meat. - We are very hungry, brother-in-law,” said Badger. 
Grizzly cried: “And so you are going to have a fat one for your sharé~ 
of the meat, Arg you, indeed!” he said to him. 
| “OQ but our sister is hungry,’’ said he. 
In truth, Grizzly merely took hold of Badger, seizing him by the arm, 
‘and flung him offito one side. 
“Go home! You shan’t have any meat at all,” he told Badger. 
Badger went home; he was afraid of Grizaly. Grizzly took all‘the 
meat. Then, in the evening, that Skunk-Woman went to the place. where 
the butchering had been done. She saw some blood. She took this; she 
took it home and put in it her kettle, and heated a part of it, of that blood, 
for herself and Badger to eat. 
Then, when ‘night camé, ‘they went to bed. As they lay there, before 
they had gone to sleep, they heard a child crying. Skunk-Woman got up 
and lit, a fire, and there she saw a child in the kettle, crying. She took it 
up, looking upon it’ with tender pity, and saying to her husband, “Let us 
eep mo “a ; 


W3 j 

Badger : said, “We shall not be able to raise him. What is he to wear? 
He will starve to death, seeing that we go hungry. Throw him out of 
doors, do,” he told her. 

“1 shall be destroying hirti;** said Skunk-Woman. 

“Do throw him out of the house,” said Badger. 

Then Skunk-Woman kissed him as she threw him out, saying, ‘Truly, 
ri am destroying him.” 

Into the tent the child camie c@awling, and, “Old woman, pick him 

a up; throw him out.” 
“ The woman picked him up and flung him outside, as he cried. 

When he came in, toddling, “Ho, old-woman, throw him out,” he 
said. : a : 

Again she threw him out. ~~ 

Into the lodge came a boy, ‘Haha, old woman, throw him outside.” 

Although the child wept, she threw him out. 

In came a youth, very handsome, with long hair, and sat down in the 
plave of honour, opposite the door, naked as he was, and ! ‘Hah, old. woman, 
lend him your blanket-robe; let him wrap himself in it.” 

Then thus spoke that youth: “Father,” he said to that Badger, 
“have you little scrap of leather, of kid-leather?” 

“Yes, I shall look for it.” 

He looked for it and found it. 
“Now, here you are, my son,” said Badger. 
a This is What he did: the youth shook the piece of leather. 

“Let there be a coat!’ said the youth. 

And really, there was a coat, which he put on. 

‘ Again, “Bring a scrap of leather,” said the youth, 
. He gave him another. The youth took it. 

“Let there be breeches for me!” 

Truly, there were some breeches. _ 

Then this youth, Clot-Child, spoke thus: “Father, a bit of buffalo ; 
hide, a bit with the wool on it!” 

‘He took it; he shook it in the air, that youth. . 

He said, “Let it be a whole fur, for my blanket-robe, and let the horns 
be on it, and the hoofs!” said the youth. 

Truly the horns were on it and the hoofs, the buffalo-hoofs. So then 
the youth wrapped himself in it. 

- Now, father, if you have a bit of otterskin, give it to me.” 

So Badger looked for it; he found some. 

“Here, son,” he said to him. 

The youth took it; he swung it up and down. 4 

He said,-“‘Let this otterskin be whole, that I may have it for a hat?” 
said the youth, “And now, father, go cut some saskatoon willows, for a 
bow.” 

So Badger went out and cut some. He was very glad that he had the 
young man. And, “Whence did he come?’’ thought Badger of his son. 
He did not know. From the blood that they had put in the‘kettle that 
youth had taken shape as a human being, because he was too angry at the 
way Badger was being abused. Therefore, this youth was-named Clot- - 
Child. Just as blood that has been standing long grows hard; this we 
call “a clot.” And from this it was that the youth sprang; therefore, he 
was Clot-Child. 


- a - 
114 


Then they made those arrows. At last morning came, and they had 
finished them all. Now they had nothing fo cat. As they sat there, early 
in the morning, up dpe that Grizglyf He said, “Ha, brother-in-law 
Badger, make a killing of those buffalé.” . 

So Badger took a lance and went out. He saw some buffalo. He 
went there to kill them. He hurled his lance at those buffaloes; he killed 
them all, Then Badger sat down on whichever one was the fattest. 

“Brother-in-law, this one, now, I want to have,” he said to Grizzly. 

“And do you really suppose you can have the fat one?!’ cried Grizzly; 
“Oh, dear, no, brother-in-law!”’, 

“Brother-in-law, even now your sister and I are hungry!” 

“Oh, no!” cried Grizzly. 

But that youth was peeking out of the tent, watching his father. 
Suddenly Grizzly seized a knife and struck Badger here, on his head; he 
knocked him headlong; he grabbed him by the arm and flung him toward 
his tent. The youth Clotkin flew into a rage, when his father was knocked 
down; he came out and started toward his father. When he got near, his 
father'‘got up; he was bleeding at the nose from the blow. When Grizzly 
saw the youth approaching, ‘‘Yoho, nephew, this is the way I treat your 
father, just by way of teasing him, whenever he makes me glad by killing 
buffalo!” to * 

Thus spoke Badger, as he kept throwing blood from his nose: “Not 
by way of teasing me, brother-in-law, but because you sorely torment me, 
brother-in-law!” . ; 

At once the youth spoke up, “In truth, you are cruelly abusing my 
father!’ he said to Grizzly, and struck him with his bow. 

He struck a big gash in the other’s body; his father, Badger, stayed 
behind his back, and he faced about. Again Grizzly, like this, pulled him- 
self together, and came attacking the youth. Again he struck him; again 
he cleft him with the blow. 
fath “Come, father, take hold of him on one side!’ the youth bade his’ 

ather. s 
_He himself took hold of him on the other side; he kept slashing him 
until he killed him. Then the oldest of Grizzly’s sons came attacking the 
youth. 

He cried, “Truly, you ruin me, Clotkin, in killing my father.” 

As he drewgpafir, the youth shot him; he slew him. Another also 
camé attacking him; this one, too, he killed with a bowshot. Finally all 
of them attacked him; he did away with all of those bears. Badger re- 
joiced that they were exterminated, who had tormented him. He had 
much meat now, for now that youth used to hunt and collect food for his 
ather. . “ 

When he had much of it, he spoke as follows: “Now, father, I shall 
leave you. I shall go where people dwell,’ said Clotkin. 

“Oh, dear!’ . 

Badger was sorry that his son was going away, for he loved him. 

_. “Not that I mean to abandon you, father; I shall be coming back,” 
said the youth. ; 

“Very well,” said Badger. 


Thereupon he arose and kissed his father and mother. Then he went 
out and departed. As soon as he was round a bend, he took an arrow and 
shot it. 

“Now, on this arrow of mine let me stand! Where yon people dwell, 
there let me fall to earth!’ he said. - ; 

Really, there he came to earth. Then he took his arrow. So he went 
to a lodge; where a poor old woman dwelt alone, there he entered. 

“Be seated, my grandchild!” she said to him. : 

In that village a most terrible bear was the chief. He had four children, 
two women and two men. Whenever he leafyed that a buffalo had been 

“nee pied: that bear who was chief would take allithe fat meat, so that now 
ey were starving, there where Clotkin wasjstaying. Clotkin did not’ 
. know that. Where the tents stood in a cirel 
buffalo-close. 
Then thus did Clotkin’s grandmother speak to him: “Grandchild, 
there is great famine here; even though the young men look for buffalo, 
“they find none; they see none. And the chief, if anyone drives buffalo 
into the corral, the chief will give him his daughters, and very handsome 
young women they are.” Then she also told him: ‘But even when buffaloes 
are killed, that bear takes all the fat meat, whatever meat is at all good, 
and nobody can kill him,:so terrible is he.” 

“Well then, grandmother, I shall make a round-up, never fear,” he 
told his grandmother. i 

“Do not!’ she answered him; “Even if you did, we should not be 
allowed to eat any good meat,’’ she told him. 

In due time they.went to bed. In the morning, when Clotkin got up, — 
his grandmother still slept.” Thus he went out of the lodge and away, to 
fetch buffalo. When. he was far off, he gathered ...... . . and 
laid them in a row, like this. —~ * 

‘He spoke:<“‘Arise ye! Arise ye! Arise ye!”’ 

A great herd of buffalo arose from the ground. 

“Stap! Stop!” he cried to them. 
' He went up to them, he saw one that was fat; he pulled a few hairs 
rom it. ; 
“Now then, you will be very lean,” he said to it; ‘Now, when I take 
you all home with me, you will run into the corral. But you,” he said to the 
one, “you will not go in. You will go over this way, a little ways up the 
river. The dogs will set upon you; and the children will shoot at you. , 
he ew te ch is my grandmother’s lodge; you will see it; there 

0 


, there in the centre was a 


y 


in the d 'y the children will kill you,” he said to that buffalo. And 
then, “So now, off with you! Run!’ 

‘ Then really, the buffalo ran off, and be ran along behind them, driving 
the buffalo. After mid-day those buffalo arrived. The one buffalo that | 
was lean ran off by itself somewhere. When the péople saw that it was 
entirely lean, they paid no attention to it. The dogs set upon it, and at 

- last the boys kept shooting at it, as it ran toward that old woman’s lodge. 
There the boys killed that buffalo. 

. The old woman was very glad, thinking, “No + I shall have meat.” 

Now Clotkin was behind some obstacle; the people did not see him, 
and, “Like a poor, ugly child let me look!” said Clotkin, 


a 
ab 


116 


Then he went home; as he walked up, his grandmother was busy 
skinning and cutting up the carcass. . 

“Splendid; grandmother! Now we shall have meat!” he cried. 

“Yes,’”’ his grandmother answered him. 

But those other buffalo, the people killed them all. And, as usual, 
that terrible bear took all the fat meat and left his followers in want.- 
Clotkin’s grandmother brought the meat into the lodge, all of it. 

“Grandmother, cover up your meat!’ And when the old woman had 
covered it, “Grandmother, go chop four willow-withes.” . 

So the old woman went out and chopped them off; she brought them. 

“Here they are, grandson,” she said. . 

“Grandmother, go out of doors! Stand there, outside the lodge!”’ 

Then that Clotkin whipped the meat, saying “Be fat, be fat!” 

Truly, the pieces turned into fat meat. 

“Grandmother, come in; now do your cooking; let-us eat!” 

When the old woman uncovered her meat and saw that it was fat, 
she covered it again. 

“Grandchild, granidéhild! We shall not keep these. If the chief 
learns of this, he will come and get it,’’ she said. 

“Oh, grandmother, let us eat,’”’ he said. 

So'then the old woman set about cooking. Clotkin smeared the fat 
meat all round his mouth, greasing his face. Then he went out of the 
odge. 

“Grandmother, make.dried meat; hang up your fats. I am going to. 
play a bit.” Se, ws ‘ 

“Grandchild, wipe your mouth?’ ; 

“So I have, grandmether!”’ \ tak 

Thus he went off to play with the sons of the terrible bear. When 

imsivith grease all over his face and his belly too, they 


those boys saw hi 
went home to tell theit.father. 


They said, “Irather, that«child whose, grandmother is so poor is all 
‘greased, here!” “ —_ 
; “Dear me, no!” cried the bear; “I saw him, and his beast was entirely 
ean,’ : ‘ 

1 Now Clotkin ran back to his grandmother’s tiny lodge. When he 
sat down inside, there came those boys sticking their heads into the door. 
They saw the fat meat. They went. back. 

His grandmother said, “‘Grandchild, didn’t I tell you not to go there? 
That bear will come and take it all,” she said. . 

‘That boy told his father. “They have much fat meat and much dried 
‘meat of the fattest,” he told him. —_ 

The chief rose to his feet and went there; when he opened the door 
and looked in, there he sawit.-- -- -” . 

“Come, Pet-Belly Child, I have come to get your grandmother's 
dried meat and ‘the fats.” - | 

“Very.well, take them,’’ he answered him. - Se, 

He took it’all, robbing them, and carried it home. ‘The boy’s grand- 
mother wept over the loss of her fat meats. ot 

He said to her, “Sit still, grandmother; I will fetch your fat meats.” 

“Do not, grandchild; he will kill you,” ” 

“No, grandmother; I'will fetch them!” 


117 


So he got up and went there. 

When he opened the door he cried, ‘‘Cripple-Bear, I have come to get 
my grandmother’s fat meats.” 

“Yes, yes, take them.” 

He entered; the other rose to his feet, seized him by the arm, and 
flung him out of the lodge. He got up again. He entered, saying to the 
other, ye have come to fetch my grandmother's fat meats.” 

“é gf i 

Already that Cripple-Bear’s sons spoke thus: “Father, do not heed 
him! Never does anyone deal thus with you: I suppose this creature has 
some unusual power! Not by a long ways will he have mystic power! 
He is nearly bursting at the belly, so pot-bellied is he.” 


As he was about to take his fat meats, that is, his grandmother’s, 
there again that chief rose to his feet. He took hold of the bear’s arms 
and broke first one, then the other; and he tore his mouth way open. So 
now the other could not hold anything. Thereupon he took home all his 
grandmother’s fat meats and slices of dried meat, while back there the 
bear was howling, ‘Oh dear, oh dear!” 

He brought them to their lodge. Then he stayed there. 

Then the bear’s sons said to him, “This is what I told you, father; 
you did not listen to me,” they told him; “Now then, try to cure your 
arms and your mouth,” they said to him. 

Vas,” y? : | 

Vainly he tried to cure himself; he was not able. At last he was near 
to death. 

“Now then,” his sons said to him, “now, father, my sisters here’’— 
those young women—‘“my two sisters here do you give to him. He will 
restore you to life, if he can marry them.” 

“Very well.” - 

Accordingly the old woman went there to give her daughters to 
Clotkin. 

She said to him, “Now, these daughters of mine are being given to 
you, that you may try to save the old man’s life,” she said. 

“Very well,” said Clotkin, “be off, go home,” he told the okt woman. 

He went there. When he entered, there was the other, With his 
mouth hanging wide open. Then he at once took hold of the other’s arms 
and rubbed them, They were well again. Also his mouth he rubbed for 
him, and he got well. Then he went back to his grandmother’s lodge; 
there he stayed. :At last night fell. In the morning, off to one side those 
young women built a lodge. When they had finished, he was sent for. 
He went there. When he entered, at once he saw the elder of the young 
women; he knew’ that she disliked him, that she thought him disgusting. 
He sat near to her; always she moved away. She did not sit close to him, ° 
for she hated him. . 2.2 ..... 4. eee 


When the younger one, by whose side he sat, prepared s some "berries 
and gave them him to eat, as-he began to eat them, the elder sister said: 
“Sister, truly you do not mind if a person looks dirty!” 

Thereupon, the next night when they went to bed, he said to his wife: 
“There, you did well by yourself in not rejecting me, he told her; “Not 
thus shall I look, as now you see me. Tomorrow | shall bring i in some 


118 


buffalo. Do you then tell your father not to deprive the people; he’ is not 
to take the fat meats; tell him this. Now, when I bring the buffalo, I 
shall come walking at the head. I shall be wearing a leather coat; I shall 
have breeches of the like; and a buffalo-robe I shall have for my blanket; 
there will be horns on it and hoofs. And an otterskin I shall have as m 

headgear. That will be I. I shall enter the buffalo-pound. The buffalo 
will follow at my heels. Opposite the entrance I shall climb up on”the 
-hurdle; up there I shall stay. You will come there; you will bring stewed 
berries. There we shall eat; we two shall eat together. If you have good 
clothes, you shall put them on when you-are about to come there,” he told 

is wife. 

Then they went to slecp. Presently that young woman woke up 
from her sleep. Her husband was not sleeping there; he had already 
gone away to fetch the buffalo. Soon day broke. And so, when they had 
got up and she and her elder sister had eaten, she went out of the lodge, to 
her father. 

She said to him, “Father, your son-in-law departed early this morn- 
ing.” 

“Oh, dear me, daughter, why did you not stop him? My son-in-law 
will freeze,” said he. 

“But this is what your son-in-law says to you, father: ‘When I bring 
the buffalo, he is not to do that way, to take the fat, meats, to rob his 
followers of the fat meats,’ your son-in-law tells you, and that you are to 
announce that they shall watch for buffalo. This is what your son-in-law 
said.” 

“Very well, daughter, I shall stop; as my son-in-law says I shall do.” 

Thereupon the young woman went home. 

Then that'old man went outside and said, ‘Young ‘men, be o on the 
lookout. Early in the morning, I hear, my son-in-law went out to fetch 
buffalo,”’ said the old man. 

Accordingly the young men kept watch all day. After the day had 
reached noon, there came the buffalo. Already that young woman was 
cooking berries, thinking that doubtless her husband would soon arrive. 
Behold, as the herd approached, those young men saw a very handsome 
youth leading at a run the buffalo, who followed at his heels. Not at all 
did they recognize that youth. He promptly entered the pound; then 
at a point opposite the entrance that youth fiung himself climbing to the 
top of the hurdle; at that moment the buffalo ran in. At once she‘ 
saw the handsome youth: he was her husband. At once the young men 
and the women climbed up from all sides to see the buffalo. And while 
they were shooting at the buffalo, that young woman went to give her 
husband the berries which she had placed in a bowl:. The elder sister, 
who had scorned him, saw him; now that he was handsome, she liked him, 
as she Baw her younger sister climbing up to give him the berries, saying 
to him, ‘Here, take these.” The youth took them. Everyone liked the 
youth. So then the elder sister, who had scorned him, ran home. - 

She said to her mother, “Mother, let me have some berries!” 

Her mother gave her some. Then she stewed them. She did not stew 
them long, for she thought, “It is almost time for our husband to come 
home,” and was happy over the thought. Because she had seen her 


119 


younger sister eating with him, and thought, “I want to eat there, too, oan 
she went off to take her berries there. 
“Here, take these,” she said to him. 


The youth told her, “Bring them up here,” he said to her who had 
scorned him. 

So the woman went up. Just as she came near, she slipped onggne of 
the logs; down she went; her berry-stew spilled; one of her felts 
caught; she hung there in "the air. Everybody laughed, women, children, 
and all. Soon the young woman wept with shame at having fallen down. 
At last she got herself free. She went home weeping. As for the others, 
when all the buffalo were killed, Clotkin went home. 


When they entered their tent, she who had scorned him, “Sister, let 
me help him on with one of his moccasins; let me put one of his moccasins 
on his foot,” she said, but, ‘“No!” answered the youth. 


Now it was his turn to scorn the elder sister, who had scorned him. 
So thus they dwelt there. The elder sister unceasingly wept for shame 
at having fallen. She was “always wandering about. Then it came to the 
_point that all kinds of people asked her, “Why? Why do you weep?” 

“Because Clotkin put me to shame and scorns me,” she would say. 

“Child, everyone is fond of Clotkin,” that woman ‘would be told, as 
she went about and wept. . 


Then at one time she saw an old woman who asked her, “Why, grand- 
child, do you always weep?” 

“Because Clotkin put me to shame,” she told her. 

h _ “There, wait a bit and I shall put him to shame,” the old woman told 
er. 
' Presently, as Clotkin went about, he came upon a little brook. The 
handsome youth crossed it and went somewhere on the other side. 

On his way back, he saw an old woman, who said, “Grandson, take 
me on your back; I cannot get across.” 

“Grandmother, I shall make a little bridge so you can ‘Walk. ” 

“Grandson, I should fall into the water,” said the oie woman. 

At last he consented. 

He took her on his back and carried her across. 

But when he said to her, ‘““Now, grandmother, here you are!” that old 
woman would not get down. 

When he tried to pull the old woman off, he could not ‘get her free; 
like iron were her arms and legs. So then he did not care to go home, for 
he was ashamed to be carrying the old woman on his back. But in time, 
here, like this, she had him almost strangled. .So at last he went home. 

When that elder sister saw him, she laughed much, saying, ‘“What 
was he so proud about, this Clotkin who comes with an old woman riding 
on his back?” 

When the young woman saw her husband, she was greatly distressed. 
Although she clubbed her, she could not kill her. Though all the people © 
clubbed her, they could not kill that old woman.. Finally Clotkin was 
near to death. At last he did like this, like this, being unable to walk. 
Then, where the lumps of clotted blood had been laid in a heap, thither he 
flung himself. The old woman was holding fast to nothing but a clot of 
blood. But Clotkin rose from the ground off at one side. 


120 


The old woman said, ‘‘Grandson, please let me live!’’ 

“Yes,” said Clotkin. 

With that he took the old woman, holding her by the fcet. 

Thus he spoke: “Now, old woman, off in the future there will be 
mortal men; this they will say’’~and he flung her down; only one foot 
. could be seen.of that-old-weman—“Pig-vermilion,’ they will say!” 
“Come here!” he said to the woman who had scored him. 


Weep as she might, he took hold of her; where a tree stood, he flung 


her against it. 

“This is where you will stay fast: ‘Glowing fungus,’ the people will 

call you. You will not be good for anything; you are too conceited.— 
Now, come hither, all you people! Now then, my father-in-law, you, 
your children, and your wife, now, depart! Be off! Off in the future 
mortal men will name you ‘Bears.’—And you”’—to the others—‘“you 
they will cal! wolves, and you others foxes, and you others lynxes, and 
you coyotes!” 
_ So in this wise he made all the animals. Then he went from there; 
he went home; he took his wife with him. When they had been two 
nights on the way, he came to his father, Badger. Badger was glad that 
his son had come to him. 

Then when he had been there’ one night, he said to him, “Now, father, 
you have been too good a creature. So-now, mortal men in the time to 
come will say of you, ‘Badger,’ these mortal-men. They will eat you, 
because you have been a good creature-—And: you”—to his mother— 
“ Skunk,’ they will say; a very good creature you will’be; | never will you 
bite people. There, go! ‘Polecat,’ mortal men will call you; they will 

“eat you.’ 

She departed. 

“As for me, a blood clot, blood am I. And, therefore, nothing at all ” 

And so there is nothing at all of my tale. This is where the sacred 
story ends. 


(18) Fisherskin-Hat - 
C oming-Day 


ha-kisikdw-pihtukéw. 
Kitahtawéd pdyak awa’ nédpéw kwah péyak iskwdéw, uwikimadkanah, 
nisiwak. kitahtawé awdsisah aydwdwak. dkutd ékwah ah-ay-ayatsik, 
pisistk mdtsiw awa népiw. piyisk wapamawak awdsisah, napdsis. dkwah 
Gkutah ay-aydwak. piyisk misikitiw awa ndpdsis. péti miyusiw awa 
napasis. miywayrmdwak ; sdkihiwak ukusisiwdwe. namuya kakway 
atuskdw awa népdais. tahkih miywasiniyiwa utayOwinisa, d-kaskikwatahk 
aw iskwdw ukusisah ulayowinisiyiwa. dkusi piyisk uskinikiw aw dwasis. 
dkwah awa uskinikiw émis itwéw: “ mahtih kakwd-nipah utsék,” 
itéw ohtdwiya. : 
miyakikih' awa népéw wih-kakwi-wapamdw utsékeh.  kitahtawd 
wadpamdw utsdkah ; nipahdw. dwakunih usthéw aw oskintkiw. ah-kisihdt, 
ulastutiniw, mina alsusisah aydw, nikikwaydnah Gh-upihtatwénit, dkutah 


1 Apparently a particle; meaning? 


4 
121 


ah-dsiwatéytkth uwipisisah aw Oskinikiw. uskutdkay pahkékin éh-pimikit- 
dyik ; > utasah mina G-pimikitayikih, nama wihkdts mdtsiw. 

kitahtawd omis itwaw : “néhtah, kiydnaw tst pikuh ch-ayistyiniwi- 
yahk ?” itdéw. 

“namuya. misiwé aydwak ayistyiniwak. maka namuya éh-miywalis- 
ustk, pisistk dh-mdtawdtsik. hispin sdkétsihitutstk, misi-wandtsihituwak ; 
namuya miywdtisiwak, ” ; 

“kak!” ttwéw aw uskinikiw; “ mahtih nika-kakwd-wadpamawak 
kutakak ayisiyiniwak,"' ttwiw aw uskinikiw. 

mihtatam awa kisdyiniw min dwa iskwdéw, ukusisiwadwa d-sakihdatsth. 

“mdskots ta-misi-wandtsihiw,’ dh-itéyimat ukusistwdwa, mdlow aw 
iskwdw. 

akust namuya ki-kitahamawéwak G-uth-stpwahidyit ukusistwawa. 

“ wapahkth nika-sipwéhtan, ” itwaw aw uskinikiw. 

“ héhéhdy.!" itwéw awa napdw ; “ nikusts, kd wiya adpihtaw-kisikahk 
ist ituhia 1” taw ukusisah, 

“dha,” itwéw awa uskinikiw. 

tapwa Gh-wapaniyik, sipwahtaw au uskinikiw. 

umis itwdw: “ nohtah, nak a, nik ta-takusinin, éka misi-wandtistydn- 
tipiyahk d-wih-wapamakik ayisiyiniwak,’’ ttwéw aw oskinikiw, d-pustas- 
tutindt. “haw, utsdkiwayanah-k-otastutinit nitistyihkdsun, ’’ itwéw, Gh- 
ati-wayauit. 

w'maloyiwa ukdwiya, ah-atamiskakit. dkust sipwahiaw, ah-pimuhtg 
knpa-hisik pimuhtdw, aka d-pisimuwiyik itéhkdy isih dh-atuhtét. kitahta 
ah-pimuhtat, ah-utakusiniyik, ka-wapamat pihydwah. pimwdw ; nipahbo, 
“nika-méwau, ttah kapdstydni,” dy-itéyihtah. -akust ch- Kih-utindt, ati-pa- 
paskupitéw. * . 
dy-dyapaskwayaytk d-pimuhtai, kitahtawé ka-wapahtahk.’ wistépahk- 
wayikamikus. dkutah ttuhtéw, “ mahtih kakway éma. ttah ah-ayat 2”? ay- 
itdytptah. 
\Gh-takuhtét skwahtémthk, « pihtukd, nésisimis 1” K-dtwat nolukdsiw. 
NG ah-pihtukdt, pot bhi k-payakuyiwa. 
% ta-tawaw !” itwéyiwa ; “ néhé'uhts-api,” itik.. 

‘bhi pihéwah kd-tahkundt miyéw ohkuma. 

“kitatamihin, nésisimis; dkutdwahk nnohté-mowa 1” ttwdyiwah. 
Gkusi dkwah amis dik: “ nosisimis, dyiman 6ma ua k-dtuhléyin. nawats 
wapahkih kiwdyin. ayimisiwak Oma ayisiyiniwak, ” jak. ohikuma. 

‘namuya, nohké ; usdm dsay nipd-stpwahtan, ' ’ dtdw. 

“hah 1” itik; “ awahd mdka, nésisé !” cttk. 

lépwdéw paminawaséyiwa, pdyak minis a&h-pakdhtdyit ékwah péyak 
istsdwants. 

a-kitapamat, “ kéhtsinad namuya mka-kispun ! ” idyihtam. 

dmis itwéw awa nétukdsiw: “ nésisimis, kika-kispun 6ma,’’ ildw. 

“ yahé 1” itéyihtam aw uskinikiw, “ namuy dtstk dwa oe ome lun 
dyimak !” itdyihtam. \ 

‘aha’ , nosisimis ! katdt ts ka-mé-mitundyimin 2” atk. 

Miskiythtamiyiwa dh-mé-mitundyimdt. ca ; 
a jkust dkwah asamik ; kus ist pakitinamak utaskihkuyiwa. dkwah 
éh-mitsisut, kahkiyaw mana ch-utinahk, d-saskamut, dtdpitsih askihkusthk, 
kdydpits nisu kiy-astéyiwa. piyisk ahkamayimow Gh-mitsisut. piyisk 
kispow ; namuya kth-kitaw ohi k-dsamikut shkumah. itisinamawiw. 
| ° ‘ 


_— : 122 


“ namuya nikth-kitdn, nohko, ” itéw. 

“nah, nosisimis tapwa éh-tkitsikawit Gh-mitsisut, aka ké-kth-kitat 
niminisimah, nikisttaépowinah !” itik. 

piyisk mistaht tipiskayiw. . 

“ nosisé, kindstuhtaé ; kawisimuh,” itik. 

kawisiméw ; wista kawisimow awa notukésiw. dhusi, Gh-wapaniytk, 

d-waniskdtstk, mina mitsiséwak, 

_ G-kisi-mitsisuistk, “a, nésisé, dkdy Gm otah ah-uhtsi-sakastak, akay 
ituhté | dyimisiw dkutah dh-aydt," ittk ; “ otéiy ist natakam’ 18 atuhtd, ” 
itik. 

“ cha’ ,” ttwéw, ch-sipwahtat, éh-pimuhlat. 

wahyaw Gh-thtat, “ mahtih tanéhk 6ma k-6h-kitahamawit nodhkum?” 
itdythtam. 

Gkulé ist waskiw. kitahtawéd, hakats Gh-tipihtaw-kisikayik, kd-wadpamat 
ayisiyiniwah ispatinahk dh-apiyit. uhpimaéh ckutah wih-atatuhiaw, dh- 
pasikowit, dkuté k-isi-waskit. Gk at ch-wih-ituhtat, maka dkuta isi iepayiw. 
piyisk amatsiwdw, dh-wipamadl. pot shi mistahi mayatisiyiwa ayisiyiniwa, 
Gh-maskawikandyit, ch-dpisisisiyit, maskwayanah Gh-kikasdkéyit, &h-piéh- 
natikut, kuntah d-pdy-ustustutamiyit, umis dh-itikut : “ utsékiwaydnah-k- 
Btastutinit, mana kipé-mdtawaé !” itik ; “ kayds, ‘ wih-papa-mitanodw, ” ktk- 
thettikawi ” 

“namuya é-papd-mdtawdydn, ” tléw. ‘— 

“hd, namuya ! pikuh ka-métawéyahk 1” ittk. 

“namuya |” itdw. 

“th nama kd-sakaék kiwdpahtén tst kd-pikihtak ? ” 

“Gha’ 1” m4 


“mistah anik dkutah d-miyusiisik uskinikiskwdwak nisu aheaydterk. 7 a 


dyokunik kik-dstwatundnaw," itik. ; oo, 

“a, namuya !” itéw. : - 

“ G, kiyam masihitutan !?? itik. ae 

piyis, ‘dha’ ,” itéw. : 

dkwah astéw utakuhp .minah uwtpisisah, hahkiyaw utayowinisah ; 
utastutinah pikuh namuy ahydw. ; 

“ hd, kitastutin mina ahth,” itik. 

“ hwd; namuya!”? - , 

ékus ist mdsihitowak. namuya. Mh-sdkeuhdrw. mwdhtsih éh-nayawapit, 
distkiwépahwéw ; kawiwémindw. - - 

“ Gh, utsékiwayanah-k-otastutinit, ‘nipisuhin kiskat, _k-6-sékuhiyin. 
payakwaw 1” itik, 


‘a, namuya ! dsay kisdkuhitin,” itéw. 
 namuya. ; paéyakwadw |” 
“ dha’ 1” 

masihitowak:  dh-mdkwd-mdsthitutsik, kwdskwiwdpindyiwa utastu- 
tinah. dkusi dkwah sakuhik ; kaskawikandnik, é-sdpuskakut, d-maskami- 
kut umiyusiwin. kd-ki-wépamat dy-isinakusiytt, dkus tsindkusiw aw uskini- 
kiw. dkuh ohi kéh-mayatisiyit miyusiyiwa. Gh-kitépamal, “ mistahi pike 
uma ch-miyusiyan, ka-kisindtsihit, d-maskamit nimiyusiwin | ” daythtam. 

ulayowinisah ulinamiytia, é-pustayswinisdyit, utastutinah mina. 

“ dkunth anih kitayéwinisah, maskwaydndtas 1” atk, ! 


123 


ulayowinisiyiwa, dkwah pustayowiniséw. wiyaskuis dkwa pisisik 
ustustutam. ayisk namuya tapwihtam kd-kih-itikut Ghkumah. 
“ héw, maskwaydndétds, ntawi-wiwitin ! itik. 
ldpwd sipwahtéwak, Gh-ituhtdtsik oh Oskinikiskwiéwah. tsik dh-thtdtsik, 
ka-pd-wayawiyit Gh dskinikiskwawah. tstk Gh-thidtstk, ka-pd-wayawiyit oh 
omisimdwa. 
wapamikwak, “ nisimis !"’ ké-matwdy-itwayit ; “ pd-wayaut ! matsik- 
Stitan ok deikintkiwak ké-pdts-dstamuhtdistk [” 
Gh-wayawit bw oskinikiskwdw, ka-wapamat ch-pétsdstamuhtayit. 
“a, nsimis, hakwats-dsiskamétutan.! awiyak nakasiwdtsih, anthi ké- 
miyusiyit kit-unapémiw, ” dtwéw aw bmisimdw. 
“ dha’ ,”’ itwéw aw dsimimaw. 
wayatsawiwak ok iskwawak.. mwihtsih wéah-nakatikutsih ustmisa, 
utihtindw Gh-asdwdpinat ; piyisk aw dmisimaw. bhi kd-miyusiyit uskinikiwah 
nawatindw, “ awa niya nika-wikimaw 1” Gh-itwat. 
maka aw Oskinikiskwdéw usimimdadw dyaku miyusiw. 
dkwah, “na kinépém !" ttaw aw dstmimaw, bhi kd-maskawikandyit 
pesstustutatkiyit 
kiwéhtahdwak. ah-pihtukdtsik, awa k-ustustutaskdt ndtéd iskwahtamihk 
Gkutah nahapiw. awd wiya kd-miyusit uskinikiw tahk dh-dkwaskitiniht, 
Gh-utsémikut uutkimdkana, mistahi miywdyihtam. dkutah aydwak, manisah 
pikuh dh-mitsitsik ok iskwéwak, piyisk tipiskdyiw, dh-apitsik. tyikuhk 
G-kawisimutstk, payakuhkwémiw awa kd-maskéwikandt. 
piyis wapaniyiw. dh-wdpahk, kikisépa dh-waniskdtsik, déh-kih-mitsi- 
suitk, wawdyiw, d-wih-matsit awa kd-miyusit. d-wih-ati-wayauit, | tahkiska- 
waw ahi ka-maskdwikandyit. 
“lan adtepiyin, maskwaydndtas ? kinahahkapihténaw i!” 
Gh-ati-wayawit, kipiwépiskawaw, kuntah éh-ustustutamipayiyit. 
-akust Gh-waniskat, umis ttdw: “ pétd pisdkanapiy,” wtdéw oh6 uviki- 
makana. ; a 7 
miytk pisakanapis. dkus dati-wayawitw, ch-at-ostustutahk, wast Gh- 
matsit, °. * 
“ kdkway dtuké ké-nipahtat !” itéw aw dmisimaw witimwa. . 
Gkusi dkwah kapé-kistk métstwak. Gh-utakusiniyth, takusin awa kd- q 
miyusit. potih apuhtéw © nikikwah péyak. dkusi -namuya takusin awa 
k-Ostustutaskat. 


a 


. piyis Gh-tipiskayik, “ namuya tsiw uyd koh-wapamaw “nantaw ? Haw .. 
undpdma. : 
“ Gha’ ; namuya noh-wipamaw. tanté kd-kawatsild 1” itdw, ayisk 
ah-pipuniyik. aoe 4 
kitahtawé ka-pé-saskahuhiéyitt, ah-pa-takubtayit eS 


| “ ni, -minah tékuhtét 1” ttwéw awa umisimaw. 
éh-pé-phtukét, dkutah iskwahtémihk nahapiw, dh-itisinamawaét pieak- 
anapiy oh owikimakanah. . ch-utstpitahk aw oskintkiskwaw, ka-pdé-pihtuk- 
dpitat péyak paspaskiwa pihydvwa. a, 
Omisi kih-ttwéw aw Gmisimaw, undipdma dh-pdsiwayit nikikwa: > 
‘nisimis, namuya kik-dsahtundnaw. kiwikimadkaninawak dy-isi-nipahat- 
oie ka-méwanawak, ” itdw usima, “ namuya tarkih-nipahidww kékway,” 
ah-itéyimat usimah uwikimakaniyiwa. 
‘dkust tapwd namuy dsahtowak, oki ka-miyusit awa nikikwa ah-méwat- 
sik. dkwah, awa usimimaw paspaskiwa mowéwak. dkusi piyis kawisi-~ 
mowak. kéyadpits péyakuhkwaémiw awa maskwaydnétas. 


124 


iyikuhk mina éh-wépantytk, iksdpa éh-waniskatsik, dsay mina waya- 
wiw, ch-mdtstt awa kd-miyusit. Gsay mina iahkiskawaw. a 

“taniy dtapiyin? késkiskwdéwaht@naw, maskwaydndtas !” itéw, ah- 
Ktpiwdpiskawat, tapiskéts ta-nipiytt, tytkhuhk dy-ustustutamiyit, kunta mana 
mistah dh-pahpit aw imisimadw, witimwa kiyipiwdpiskdmthtsth. dsay min 
ayaké sipwihtaw, dh-matsit. dyaké kapd-kisik papamuhtéw. iytkuhk 
dh-utakusik, Gsay mina takuhiéw awa kd-miyusit; asay mina nikikwah 
pasiwdw. 

“a, dkwah ké-miywayihtahkik nistdsak, tit-otastutinitsik Ohi nikik- 
waydnah !” itwéw aw émisimdw. 

iytkuhk misiah d-tipiskadyik, kitahtawd ka-pd-ustustutamtytt. 

“ hihiyt, minah wah-takuhtdt !"' ttdw witimwa, dh-windyimait. 

| Gh-paé-pihtukaéyit, &-kih-nahapiyit, k-dtisinamowat pisdkanapiy - 6wiki- 
makana. 

“maka min dtuké paspaskiwa !” itwéw aw imisimdw. 

Gh-utsipitahk, kd-pihtukadpitat amiskwah. 

“hay hay hay ! dkwah ké-miyu-mitsisuyan !” itewtiw aw uskinikisk- 
waw. 

Gkwah ch-wiyinthdt, nutunt wiyinwdytwa, akunih dh-Kisiswat, apihtaw 
usuy min 6ma éh-kisisahk., 

umis ttwdw aw Gmisimdw: “ nisimis, asamin usuy anima pahkih ; 
nista nik-dspahtsikan 1” itaw. 

“namuya ! ‘ d-isi-nipahtatstk kindépdéminawak, ka-miisindnaw,’ kikth- 
itwan oma.” 

dkwah akéwatamawdéw usimisa, amiskwa ch-mowayit. ; 

piyisk mistah d-tipiskayik, “ dstam-itah nawats ! dtah nitanaskdnihk 
apih!” itaw awa k-Ostustutaskit maskwaydndétaés. aspin, “ astam itah 
nitandskdnihk api,” k-dteht, aw uskintkiskwaw ah-mi ywdyrhtahk amiskwah 
Gh-pésiwayit ; dyaké uhtst k-oh-itai. 


dkusi dkwah aydw dkutah. dkwah céh-nipdtstk, “kisiwak dtah nipa,” . 


itik oh oskintkiskwdwa, maskwaydndias ah-itcht. 


dkust umis itwéw aw dmisimdw.: “ hihi 1” itwéw; “ utandskanthk 
wisamthk dkwa d-wih-nipdhat !” itwéw, dh-windyimat bhi witimwa. 

dkusi nipawak. dh-wapahk, dsay mina. dh-waniskdisik, mina mitsisd- 
wak. ah-kisi-mitsisutsik, dsay mina wawdytw, d-wih-madtsit. awa ka-miyusit 
uskinikiw. ah-ati-wayauit, tahkiskawiw. 
‘Stan. diapiyin ? kinahahkapihidnaw !” ctéw. 

' Kipiwdpiskawaw. pakpiw aw omisimaw, Gh dh-tdtamtht witimwa. 

dkust d-kth-waniskat, “ pétah pisdkandpty,”’ ttéw. 

Gkusi, dkwah a-kth-miyihl, wistah mdtsiw. 

“haw, nisitis, kiskiskwéwdniwihtanaw, pikuh ta-nikuhtayahk, ” ttdw. 

“Gkusi ‘nikuhtéwak, Gh-awatatsik mihiah. 

deapihg-lisikaysh, “ pita ka-mitsisunanaw, ” itwiwak ok oskinikisk- 
wdawa 


dkwah kisitapowak ; paminawaséwak, aw dsimimaw amiskwah the 


nawatsit. Gkwah.aw amisimaw a. a@watamawaw usimisah, . 
, omisiy itéw : -“ nisimis, mahtih: pahkih “pa: manipitamawin. _ apists 
msta mka-mowdw,”’ tldw. 
“nah ! dkus ani ! ist anah kintkimakan hih-nipahitw nikikwah, ta, 
mowat. ‘ ka-pah-pdéyakuh-mitsisundnaw,’ kikih-itwan, ‘nama kdkway ta- | 
kth-nipahtaw,’ ch-itéyimat niwikimakan,” itéw. 7 ~ 


e 


125 


“nah ! é-kih-pa-pahpisimitan, nisimis |" itaw. 
“aha 1 namuya ka-kth-asamiin,” ttéw umisah. 

dkusi dkwah oki ka-matsitstk, iyikuhk dy-utdkusik, takusin awa ka- 
miyusit. nikikwoh nisu pdsiwéw. iyikuhk mistah ah-tipiskayik, aékuyikuhk 
ka-pdw-ustustutahk awa maskwayandias. dh-pihtukdt, pisdkandpiy ttisina- 
mawaiw uwikimdkanah. 

émis tlaw: “ kakway minch kd-wth-atamihit ?” itwéw aw uskinikish- 
waw, 

dh-utsipitahk, nisu amiskwah kd-pihtukdpitat. 

“hay hay ! dkwah dwakuni nka-kanawdythtén usuyah, nohtawly 
nikdwiy ka-mitsitsik [” itwiw. “haw, 6téh uhtst apih,” itéw, itah é-kih- 
miyu-nahastasul. . 

‘ah, namuya !” ttwiw maskwaoydndtds, dh-windyimisut. 

« oth kiyam apih !”? itik. 

piyisk dkuté nehapiw, dkwah awa uskinikiskwéw ot dskwahtamihk- éh- 
wiyanihadt amiskwoh. dkust dh-kisi-wiyanthat, dkwah paminawasidw, 
amiskwah ch-kisiswat. 

dmis ttwéw ow Smisimaw :  nsimis, asamin péyak usuy, ’ itéw. 

“nah, dkus ani! kisteh kiwikimdkan kah-nipahat usdyiwa Gwaku 

mitsih 1” itdw umisah, aka d-wth-asamat. 
. wiyawd piku miyusiyiwa dh-méwatstk ; . ayisk awa kd-miyusit ka- 
nipahdt nikikwah namuya winuyiwa. dkust piyisk éh-kisi-mitsisutsik, 
mistah Gh-tipiskdytk, kawisiméwak. dkwah aw dsimimdw oh bnaipdma 
akwanahkiw, dh-niséhkwamitstk. ; 

imis itwdw aw Smisimdw: “ wawats dtukw dwa dkwah é-wih-wihpa- 
mat !” ttéw. co - 

“nah! ahpoh kiya wiythpémat kiwikimakan, adkaéh dh-miywasik 
kakway dh-nipahtwask |” itéw. 

; dkust nipawak. kikisépad minah d-waniskatsik, mina G-kih~mitsisutsih, 
kiyipahk pastkéw awa ka-miyusit, é-kistwasit, d-wih-matsit, aH-ah-ayiwthi- 
kut maskwayandtasah. dsay mina Gh-ati-wayauit, dsay mina tahkiskawéw. 
Omis téw: “tan bm dtapiyin.? kinahGhkapihtanaw a itéw, Gh- 
 Kipiwapiskawat, éh-ati-wayauit. 
. “nétah pisékandpiy,” dw uwitkimadkanah. 
é-kth-miyikut, dkust wayauwiw, wistah gh-méaisit. 
~<epheyano Gh-thtat, Omis itwdw : “ matwan tst Gh-kikihimaskamit nimin- 
; ahowin ké-maskamit nimiyusiwin ? ” itwéw maskwaydnatas. 

dkus ah-sipwahtat, d-kikasamadt mana, kitahtawé kd-wapamdat apisi- 
mésusah. nisu nipahdw unitsiniwa, mitunih Gh-wiyinuyit. dkuyikuhk . 
kiwéw, Gh-utapat bhi nisu. Iitahtawd “mitun ch-utékusik, kd-takusihk awa 
kd-miyusit. pdsiwiw iyapéw-dyisah apisi-mésusah ; namwats nisitustyiwa, 

dikwah Gh-tipiskdk, kd-wayawit ow oskintkiskwavw, “ sak nama mayaw 
takuhtéw,” dh-itdyimat dwikimdkanah. 

“(isk oyah ch-kdtawdyimat undpaém isk dsah !” k-dtwat aw’ dmisimaw, 
ah-pahpihat usimah. 

Kitahiawd wayawitimihk ah-nipawit aw dskinikiskwiw, kd-pahtahk 

‘wahyaw dh-pd-nikamuyit awiya. . miywiyihtam éh-nikamuyit. ad, mitunt 


kiyipah kisiwak ka-pa-nikamuwit. pihtukdw, “dwaku!” Gh-itéyimat -\~ 


uwikimadkana, om 6kisitipéwin ch-kisisahk, bivipah ha-patwdroitarnayit 
d~péw-ustustutamiyit, 
831869 


aS 


126 


“ath | mina takusthk |" itwéw aw. dmisimdw, tsikémad ah-windyimat 
. witimwa. ey 


ah-pd-pthtukdyit, itisinamawéw pisdkandpiy. dh-utstpitahk aw’ dskin- 
ikiskwéw, namuya kaskihtaw. pasikow awa maskwaydnétds; dh-~utsipi- 
tahk, nisu apisi-mosusah ka-pihtukdpitdt. 


cr eens 


o 


“hay héy! dkwah nisu nk-dydwawak apsimbsusiwaydnisak ! a ee 


iwaw. 


sinahdt unadpima. “ 7 ; 
“ nah, wisdmihk dkwa kd~pustaskisinahat awa umaskisinthkdwinah |!” 
Gh-itét usima. 
“nah, ahpoh kiya pwdstaskisinahat mana, éka dh-miywasiniyik kak- 
way dh-nipahtat kinapdém 1” rence 


akusi dkw d-kih-mitsisulsik, dkwah wiyanihtakiw aw _dskintkiskwaist 


‘é-Kisi-wiyanthat, dyikuhk dkwah kawisimowak, ah-nipatsik. kikisdpda,“Gh- 


waniskdlsik, d-kih-mitsisutsik mina, wawdyiw awa kd-miyusit, ch-kisiwasit, 
é-with-miatsut, d-ah-ayiwihikut Ghi maskwaydndtdsah. sdskwats wayawiw. 
. bmis itwéw aw Gskinikiskwdw: “nah, tanahk dwah utahkiskawadh 


mana, wih~wayawitsih ? nadpdwisitukd, Gh-ah-ayiwihikut 1” iwdw. 


_dkust dkwah wistah wawdyiw maskwaydndlas, éh-matsit, piyisk wahyaw 


” Gheayat. kitahtawé ch-pon-apihta-kisikayik, akuytkuhk ké-wapamat moswah. 


nipahiw dkunih, kahkiyaw dh-utapat, Gh-kiwét, dkwah awah ka-miyusit 


wawdskdsiwah pdyak nipahdw, tyapdw-dyah ch-sihkatsiytt. Gy-uldkusiniytk, ~ 
Shewapamat © 


takusin. mistahi miywiyihtam aw umisimaéw, wawdskésiwah 
“hay hay ! dkwah dyaké kiy-dmaskisiniyahk 1” itwéw. ee 
piyisk mistah dh-tipiskdyik, dh-wayawit dw bsimimaw, Gsay- mina ka- 
péhtahk ch-pd-nikamuuit awiya, dkwah kisiwak kiy(pah. ka-pad-nikamuwtt, 
Gh-na-nipawit, Gh-miyuhtawdt bhi kd-nikamuwit.--kisiwak dh-pédy-ayayrt, 


dkusi nahapiw, Gh-utinahk maskisinah é-miywasiniyikih, d-pustaski- 


ké-pihtukit ; maskwaydndétas ded awah_ka-pé-nikamuwit mana utasémah. - 


, th-pthtukit, itisinamawiw_pisdkandpiy. dh-utsipitahk, namuya kaskihiaw; 


dkwah awa maskwaydndlas kd-pihtukdpitat nisu méswah. . 

“hay hay! tipwé nimiywiyihtan, pdyak kit-imaskisiniydhk, dkwah 
nohtawiy nistdsak pdyak tit-6maskisinitsik 1” atwdw. — .. 

namudis dkwah pikiskwéw aw Omisimadw,: dh-ayiwihimiht undpéma. 
‘ékusi dkwah iyéyaw asamiw aw bnapdma uskinikiskwdw. &-kth-mitsisutsik, 
dkwah wiyinihtakiw aw uskinikiskwiw : pot ohi kd-wiyinuyit Gh moswa. 
- “ nisimis,” itwiw aw dmisimaw, “ pdyak anima uskdt miyin’; nka- 
pdstasun, ” itéw. - . 


“nih, dkus dni! namuya ha-kih-miyitin ; kipakwdétéw awa kitim ; 


namuya ta-kih-wihkasiniyiw éh-nipahtat kékway,’” dw umisah. — _ 
dkust piyisk mistahi tipiskayiw. piyisk kawisiméwak. Gh-wapaniyik, 


* Gsay mina é-kih-mitsisutsik, dsay mina matsiwak. ; ; 
6mis itwiw awa maskwaydndlas : “ pata kipisdkandpim, ” iiwuvikim- . 


« 


dkana, « - . 
dh-matsit, wahyaw Gh-ihtat, npahdw wakaydsah mitunth ch-wiyinuytt. 
tkwah awa. kd-miyusit takwahnawa nipahdw. . kéydpits namuya wiyinow 
awa takwahnaw. iyawis mina dh-idpdteik kikway ké-npahtatsik, ékusi 
ékwah dy-ulakusik, takusin awa kd-miyusit takwahndwa ké-nipahat. dkwah 
mistah Gh-tipiskak, ka-takusihk awah maskwaydnétds, dh-pihtukdt. dsay 
miywiyihtum aw éskinikiskwiw, dh-pihtukdyit. pisdkandpiy éh-utsipitahk, 
namuya kaskthtaw. an a 


« 


2 


/ 


a 


a 


127 : 4 


te mis itwdw: “kékway minah kd-wih-atamihit niwikimdkan ? » ibe 
dkwah. 

“vy,” deay itwéw aw dmisimdw, “ wasamihk dékwa ‘niutkimakan, , 
Ghitat 1?’ itwéw. x 
“nah, tsikima namuya dkusi nititaw, dh-mah-mi iitu-nipahtwawit 1” 

iiwéw aw dsimimaw, awa maskwaydndtas ah-sakihibuyit uwikimGkanah. 


dh-utsipitahk, wakayésah kd-pihtukdpitat. ~ 

“hay héy hdy (" ttwiw aw ‘Sakinikiskwaw ; ; * tapuvdd “mistaht wih- 
miywéythtam nohtawiy, mistahi pimiy “ dh-wih-aydyan, masku-pimiy f” 
itwdw. 

dkusi pitah pustaskisinahaw “qatkimbkana maskisinah. - tkusi “ékwah- 
Gh-asamat, dh-mitsisutsik, tahk Gh-kitapamdt aw Omisimdw usimah, ‘dh- 
akawatamawat ah-miyw-milsiowyit. Gh-kisi-mitsisulsik, dkwah wiyinthtak- 
déwak. .. Gh-kisi-wiyanthatsik, dkuyikuhk mistahi tipiskdyiw. piyisk kawisi- 
méowa 7: 
dmis itwhw maskwayandtaés; “haw,” itdw uwtkimdkana, “ kd-wadpahk 
namuya nika-mdtsindn,” itéw, “ ta-~matutisiyahk,” itéw ; “ kitapatsihun 
aka-ké-pakwasiyin,” itdw; “ namuya dkus deindkusiydn ; aw dwa kitim 
-k-dsindkusit, dkus dsindkusiydn, d-maskamit nimiyusiwin, dh-waydsih- 
sakotsihit. wiy dma ulisindkusiwin b6ma k-dsindkusiyan,” itdw ; “ dkuyi- 
kuhk mistahi mday-isihtaw nitayéwinisah, anihi ka-kikiskahk. wapahkih 
matutisanihkihkan. dkusi pikuh nka-sakétsthaw, ” ti; “Gah waya- 
witimihk btah, awa kisiwak nikih-wapamdw asinty h-mibikitit, ” tldw ; 
. -“ wake ka-kisdpiskiswaw. dkwah awah maské-wiyin dwaku kik-dpahkwan. . 

dkwah wiydkanthk pimiy kika-tihkisdn, pimiy ket-Osthtayin, dwaké uhtst » ~~ 

ta-sikahahtawak aw dsiniy,” ildw ; of kispin matutisiyahkuh, kisisutsz, 
‘ pdskinah |’ itwétet, dka lapwithtawahkan ; kimta wih-paskinahih, -mamtit- 
simindhkan,” itdéw. 

“ éha’ ,” ttwaw aw uskinikiskwdéw. 

akust nipdwak, 

dh-wapahk, kiksdpd d-waniskatsik, dh-ma-mitisutsik, Smis ttwdw 


maskwaydndtas : “ nitsi-nahahkis |” ‘ttéw. L 
“ tanahkd 2” ee _ 
“mia namuya ka-matsinanay. ital ipayiwepinanatin; binastusine * 
dtukd,’’ wtdw. . , 
@ ha’ , nindstusin, ”’ ttwdw. ra 7 Ao . » 
“ ka-matutisiyahk, _ka-sdsdwihkasoyahk, ” itdw, Ke wi PR 
“ dha’ , mitunth nnohti-matutisih, " dtwéw. a: i 


dsay Omis itwiw aw Gmisimaw: “ namuya bika-matutisin sued 
kika-winihkasun," ttdw uwikimdkana, ~ ° 

“hd, nindstusin uma. kiydm nko-matutisin,” ttwdw.- 

_ Ghusi é-kth-mitsisutsik, dkwah wayawiw aw Gskinikiskwdw, dw-usihtat 
matutisin, dkwah ah-ponahk. " 

dh-natét asiniyah ohi ha-misikitiyit, ékwah é-waskaskawdt, “ asinty, 
yahkistawin 1” tldw. 

Gt dhmisikitiyit, sakuhiw, dh-uhpindt, Gh-Kkiwahtahat ; dyakuni d- / 
kisdpiskiswat. dkwah Gh-kisdépiskisuyit, apahkwiw ohi wiyinwah itimthk, ~ / 
masku-wiyinwah, dkwah waskits utakuhpiwiwa. dkwah mina pimiw uma / ~ 
usthiaw, dyuku mina d-wih-uhtst-sikahahtawayit asiniyah. 


Caen mo / 


“128 


" sdsay dkwah niktsthtan, niwikimdkan,.” itdw. 
“ haw, nitsi-nahahkis, kiwth-matutisithtanaw 1” itéw. 
nah 1” itwéw umisimaw ; “namuya | usim ka-wth-miskulénamawin 
niwikimdkan, dhemiyusit 1” itéw ustmah. 
“nah ! tinisi k-dsi-miskulonamalan d-nihtd-minahut niwtkimakan ?” 
tldw. . : 
“ nitim,’' ttedw maskwaydndtds, “ pisdkanapty tahkumtamaw kiviki- 
mikan, ta-mitsiminaman pisdkandpiy, dka kd-maskamikawiyan kiuiki- 
mikan, ”” ; 
~ dha’ fr TT 
lapwd kd layswinisiwak atawah, ch-pihtukdtstk Gm itah ka-matotisutsik 
dkwoah tdpwd aw omisimdw pakwahtéhéw uwtkimadkana, dy-uhlsi-saka- 
pakinat uutkimdkana, d-kustahk ka-~maskamiht. dkusi ékwah mitunt kipah- 
wiwak dkwah, > v 8 
dkwah vikiskwdw awa maskwaydndlds, éh-itwdt, “haw, é-ndstusiydn 
k-6-matulisiydn, maka d-pakwdtamdn 6m dsindkusiyan 1" ttwdw ; ‘ kawih 
nimiyusiwin nik-ayan |” itwiw, pimiy dw-uhtsi-sikahdhlawat asiniyah Ghi. 
Kisiséw awa kd-miyusit uskintkiw. 
dmis twdw: “ paskinamuk ! nikisisun 1” itwdw. 
namuya tipwdhtam awa uskinikiskwéw, ahkaméyiméw d-stkahahta- 
wat asiniyah. 
min dwa ahkamdyiméw, “ pdskinamuk | nikisisun ! ” Gh-itwil. 
namuya tépwihtam aw oskinikiskwéw. 
Omis itwdw : “ niwikimdkan, pdskind |” itéw. 
d-wih-paskinahk,, umisah awah mamitsimindw. 
‘awas 1 nivikimakan kisisow 1” itéw. 
namuya. tipwihtawdéw, umisah éh-mamdtsimindt. 
piyisk Smis itwiw awa 1 maskwaydndlas : “haw, niwikimdkan, paskin 
akwah I” ttwaw. 
dsay maskamdw umiyusiwiniyiw, kawiy dy-utinahk 6ma kd-kth-miyusit. 
dh-paskindt awa émisimaw, dwakunch. 6hi maskwaydndlasah kd-mitsiminat 
pisikanapiw uhtsi, 
“ nnd, nisimis, dsah kah-miskutahpitsitutsik kiwikimakaninawak 
‘d, namuya ‘!” itéw awa ké-miyusit uskinikiw ; “ dwakw ana kiwikim- 
akan, nitim, G-kith-maskamit nimiyusiwin. dkuytkiuhk dy-ihkdyihtaman, 
nitaySwinisah iyikuhk d-sdsawthlat, d-sdsawiskawdt nitastutinah,” itwéw. 
lipiskéts ayiwadkds ah-miyusiyit, mistahi miywayihtam aw Gskintkisk- 
_ wiw, undpdmah dyisindkusiyit. aw Gmisimdw mdtow, dh-mdydtisiyit 
undpima, namuya yisiskiyimdw, tahk ch-ustustutamiyit, Gh-maskauikan- 
ayit, ohpimd Gh-nipawit, ih-matut. 
“tandhkih, nitim, ké-~mdtuyin? kuy-utsdima mana _Riuikimdkan t 
- utedm ékwayak !” itdw. 
- namuya wih-utsimdw, dh-windiyimat undpima, tahk d-malut, 
, ‘ nisim, kiyam nista nik-anapdmin kindpdm 1” itéw. 
“ah, namuya ! nitim kéndpdmin oma 1” itdw. ar 
dkusi éh-pth-puhpauipayihtat utayowinisah aw sakintkiw, Law miywd~ 
siniyiwa. dkwoh é-pustay Gwinisdtsth, awa maskwaydnitds d-kisi-pustayo- 
winisdl, kd-sipwdhtdt ; ayis pakwatam dh-pakwatikut uvikimakana. sip- 
wahtiaw. dkwah awa dkutah ayaw. dkwah mistahi miywdyihtam aw bsimi- 
maw, 


7 


en 129 
“tipwd ntdpatsihun aka d-kih-dtawéyimitin !”' itéw uwikimakanah. 
dkwah awah umisimaw, “ nisimis, nistah, nka-wikimdw kindpdm, 

itdw. 

“ namuya l nitim kikih-windyimik, ” ttéw. 

dkust dkwah piyuwak. tahtu-kisikdw dkwah matsiw, mustuswah dkwah 
dh-nétsihdt, Gh-iyawis Gh-pdtsitapdt mustuswah ; piyisk mistahth ayawak 
milsiwin. kitahtawd dh-ati-miyuskamiytk, dkwah ‘ulsawasimisiw ; nipdsisah 
aydwiw. dkwah usém mistah dy-itdyihtahk, tyikuhk dh-aydtsik mitstwin, 
namuya tahtu-kisikdw mdtsiw. kitahtawd d-sakdwdt, kdwét, kd-pdtsdstam- . 
ublayit uskinikiwah nisu. kiwdw. 

whtukdt, “hd, nisu pdtastamuhtdwak uskinikiwak 1” itwdéw. 
‘ nih, dkunik dtuké nistésak 1" k-dtwéyit. 
hh dkusi paminawaséw aw iskwdw, “ ta-milsisowak nistésak, " Gh-tiyih- 
ta 

pouh d-pd-sdkiwdtetk 6k oskinikiwak, " ké-wapahtahkik wayawitimihk 
mistaht dh-akutdyikih wiydsah. 

“hay hay 1’ ké~pdy-itwéyit ; “ taépwd nimiywayihten ay-i8i-wapah-~ 
tamdn !” k-dtwéyit. 

ah-pd-takuhtiyit, “ ahd, ta-tawdw |” itéw wistawah., 

dh-pihtukdtsik, “ haha "YP miywiyimdwak wistiwa. pdyak namwats 
undpdmiyiwa usimiwdwa. 

‘diya, itwéw, “ tanihk dtukdé pdyak ékd k-onapémit 2?” ttaw. 

“ ydah, Gt dna kisim kith-undpémiw ; maka ki-sipwdéhtéyiwa undpéma, 
dh-pakwdtat muystas. kinwdsk data kih-unapamiw, maka aka tépwd d-nihta- 
minchuwit. kikiskéyimdwaw dtukd : maskwaydndtds dsiyihkdsut.” 

“ddha ! dyakw dna kikth-uvistawindwaw |” itdw. 

nipdwisiwak ok Gskinikiwak, dy-isindkusiyit, é-kth-uwistdwitetk. 

bmis ttwéwak : “ anuhts ma k-stdkusik otah ta-kapdsiw nohtawiyindn, 
ch-péy-ispitsiyahk uma, mistah uh-nodhidhkatéhk ; :maka d-kiskdyihtahk 
nohtawiy om obtah éh-ayayin, -nistah, k-d-pay-ispitsiyah. Gkust d-kth- 
itdythtahk nohtawiy, otah ka-kth-pd-nakatat nisima,, ‘ maskots aka awiya 
dtawédyimikutwdawt, wikimikutwawe, ta-nipahtayit ki way pisiskiwah, ’ 
kih-itéyihtahk néhtdwiyindn, ” itwiwak 6k Gskinikiwak ; - “ mistahi ta- 
miywdythtam, Gmist wapahtahkih,” itéw. - 

miywdythtamuk 6k Gskinikiskwawak é-wih-papitsiyit bhidwiyiwawa. 
Ghusi tépwa kdétahtawd a-pit-pikiskebiyit ohtawiytwawa, é~pd-sdkdwdyit. 

mis itwiyiwa: “ miydmay bhi wiydsah 1” itwéyiwa; “ ninohtah- 
katah |" iteiyiwa, ké-wayawit aw Gskinikiskwéw, “ dha’ , wiydsah maka |” 
Gh-itét shidwiyah. 

ta-nandskumow awa kisdyiniw, d-miywdyihtahk, dkwah “ dkusi d-kih- 
ayettaman, ntiwdsimisitik, dtah k-oh-kth-pé-nakatitakuk, Nba utawd- 
simisa. Fi 

482 wayawiw aw “oskinikiskwaw ; Gmis ttwiw: “ dhunihs mak ahi ~ 
niwiydsimah, pikw animah Gh-miywasikih dy-itdyihtaman, nohtah, dkutah 

- kapésih, ” itéw. 
dkwah tanihi ch-miywasgriyikih wiydsah, dékutah panahikayiwah 

tawdsimisah, 

“ haw, nlinimitike !” itéw ohi; “ttah dsi-miywayihtamak ‘wiyasah, 
kapdsik, ”’ itéw ayistyiniwah. 

dkust kapdsiwak. dkuyihuhk ékwah niawi-pihtukdw uldnisah wikiyihk, 
Gh-wapaméat unahahkisimah, potih dsisimah mina dsay misikitisiynoa, 


” 


aig? 


“a 


a, 


2 130 


Gh-utindl, d-wiy-ulsimdat. dsisimah. mistahi miywéyihtam. hahkiyaw i 
ay yisiyiniwak miywdythtamwak. piyisk kinwdsk dkutah ayawak, iytkeuhle. 


a-misikitiyit ukusisitwdwa. \ 


kitahiawd émis ttwdw awa kisdyiniw: “ ntdnis, namuya tsi wihkats 
‘ kipéhtawaéw ninahahkisim, awiya ta-pimatisiyit ta-wahkomat ?” 


“ dla wey Gna, ‘nohtdwiy mina nikawiy,’ itwéw mana, ‘kayds dkwah 
ka-nakatakek, ’ itwew médna.”’ 


“hah, dha’ , ntanis, kaskdéyihtamétukinik aniki nitéhtawaw. ituhtih- 


kak ; kiyask ts niawi-pamihahkanik kistkus minah kists,” itéw utdnisah ; 


7 dkuyikuhk ‘nimamahtakusin, tyitkuhk kdékway ah-nipahtat ninahahkisim, 


ah-mitsiydn, ’' tldw. 
| “ haha’ , nka-vihtamawadw,” ittk utanisah. 
Gh- kiwi, mis itaw uwikimakanah : “"dtuhiéhkak shidawiyah ninahah- 
kisim, ’ Gh-itwat nohtawiy, ” itdw. 
a dha? , wapahkth ka-sipwahtandnaw, kitimakisitukantk ; maka kayds 
kd-pd-nakatakik, " itéw. 
tapwd tyikuhk Gh-wapaniyik, wawdyiwak, dh-wih-sipwéhtdt, . tipwa 
kahkiyaw awiyah : ayisiyiniwah. Gh-atamiskakutsik. dkus d-stpwahtatsik, 
mind Gh-Mth-kapdsitsik, dkuyikuhk wapahtamwak wikiwdw- tah k-dtuhtit- 
at 
“ hdéw, nika-nikdnipahtan ; nka-wihtamawaw ntawih nohidwiy é-wih- 
takuhtdyahk, ”’ ttaw. 
_ ot dha’ 1” 


PGkwah sipwépahtaw. dh-takuhtét, potih namwats mamihk kékway — 


wapahtam, ta-mitsiyit. . 

d-pthtukdt, pot chi ay-apiyiwah Ghtdwiyah ukdwiyah, “hay hay ! 
nikusis takusin |” dh-itwdyit, d-atamiskakut, kunt h-matuyit ukdwiyah, 
iyikuhk dh-miywaythtamiyit dh-wapamikut. 

dkusi nandskumuyiwah. — . 

“a, ksiwak pdy-htaw dh-pdé-witsdwak iskwéw, minah kosisimiwaw,”’ 
ildéw. ‘ . ; 
nandskumiw awa kisdyiniw. 

“mahtih 1!” itwéw awa nodtukdsiw, dh-wayawit, dh-ntawi-nakiskawat 
ustimah adkwah dsisimah. itah G-nakiskawéi, utsimdw. 
“nistim 1!” itdw; “ pdstw nésisimis !  itaw. 

miytk, min dkunth dh-uy-utsémadt. dkus d-ati-sipwdhtdtsik, dsisima 

d-nayimdt,. ah-takuhidtsik, d-pihtukahdt, simak awa kisdyiniw niuméw 


“Gsisimah, céh-uy-utsémdl. ‘Gkusi Gkutah dkw d-ay-aydtsik, dkwah niinah 


Gh mah malsit aw uskinikiw, dkwah adwah uskintkiskwiw mistah ch-atuskat, 
Gh-pamihat umandtsimdkanah. kitimakdyimdw mituni, tyikuhk éh-miyu- 
pamthdt usikusah usisah mina: 

aspin dkuyikuhk Gh-iskwék Gtsimuwin dtayohkdwin. dkuyikuhk. 


ae 


Once upon a time there were two people, a man and his wife. Presently 
they had a child. There where they dwelt the man would always hunt. 
And so, in the course of time, they had a child, a boy. They stayed in that 
place. In time the boy grew big. He turned out handsome. They loved 
him; they were fond of their son. The boy did no work at all. His clothes 
were always good, for the woman sewed her son’s clothing. So in time the 
child became a young man. 


7 


| 
131 = 


Then that young man spoke as follows: ‘Pray, try to kill a fisher,” 
_ he said to his father. 

And so that man tried to get sight of a fisher. Presently he saw a 
fisher; he killed it. The youth prepared it. When he had finished it, he 
wore it asa hat. He had arrows, too, and used an otterskin for his quiver, 
to put his arrows in, that youth. His coat was a hide ornamented with 
quill-work; and his breeches, too, were worked with quills. He never 
went hunting. 

Then at one time he spoke thus: “Father, are we the only human 
beings there are?’ he asked him. ; 

“No. Everywhere are people. But they are not good, they always 
contend. When they defeat one another, they destroy each other; they 
are not good.” 

“Just think of it!” said the youth; “I should like to try and see the 
other people,” said the youth.” 

The old man was sorry at this, and the old woman, for they cherished 
their son. 

‘Surely he will go to his undoing,” thought the woman of their son, 
and wept. 

And so they were not able to keep their son from going forth. 

“Tomorrow I shall go,” said the youth. 

“Dear me!” said the man; “My son, do not go in the dirdetion of 
noon!” he told his son. , 

' “Very well,” answered the youth. 

Accordingly, when day broke, the youth departed. 

He said, ‘Father, mother, I shall come here, if I am not destroyed. 
It is only that I want to see the people,” said the: youth, as he put on his 
hat. “Now then, Fisherskin-Hat is my name,” he said, as he stepped out 
of-the house. 

His mother wept as she said farewell to him. So he set out and walked 
along. All day he walked, walking in the direction where there is no sun. 
Presently, as he walked along, in the evening, he saw a partridge. He 
shot it and killed it, thinking, “I shall eat it when’ I camp for the night.” 
So he took it and plucked it. 

As he walked by-a place where there were clumps of trees, presently 
he saw a little lodge of smoked-up leather. He went there, thinking, “I 
wonder what sort of person stays there.” > 

When he reached the doorway, ‘Come in, grandchild!” said an old 
woman. 

When he went in, there she was, all by herself. 

‘Come in!”’ she said; “Sit over there!” she told him. 

He gave his grandmother the partridge he was holding. 

“Thank you, my grandchild; this is exactly what I was wanting to 
eat!’ she said. Then she told him thus: ‘Grandchild, it is a hard place to 
which you are going. It would be better if you went home tomorrow. 
Hard to deal with are the people there,” his grandmother told him. 

“No, grandmother; for now I have already set out’ this way,” he 
answered her, 

“Dear me!” she said to him; “Then be eareful, grandson!” 

And so she set about cooking a meal, putting in the pot a single berry 
and a single bit of chopped meat. 


132 


‘When he observed her, “Surely I shall not eat my fill!’ he thought. 

Thus spoke his grandmother: “My grandchild, you will eat your fill 
of 'this,’”* she told him. 

“Goodness me!’ thought the youth, “Plainly, I shall not be able to 
think about her!’’ he thought. ‘ 

“No, my grandchild! Why should you have to think about me?” she 
said to him. 

She knew that he had taken her as his object of meditation. 


So then she gave him to eat; she gave him her cooking-pot, just as it 
was. As he ate, whenever he took up the whole contents and put it into 
his mouth, when he looked at the little pot, there lay the two morsels 
again.. At last he ate all the faster. At last he had enough; he was not 
able to eat up the things his grandmother had given him to eat. He 
handed it back to her. 

“J cannot finish it,. grandmother,” he said to her. ; 

“Dear me, truly my grandchild merely pecks at his food, seeing that 
he cannot finish my little berries, my bits of cooked meat!” she said to 

im. , 
By now it was deep night. 
“Grandson, you must be tired from walking; lie down,’ she told him. 


He lay down; the old woman, too, lay down. When dawn came, 
when they got up, they ate again. 

When they had eaten, “(Now then, grandson, do not go in this direction 
whence comes the morning light! Hard to deal with is he who dwells 
there,” she told him; “(Go this way, toward the north,” she told him. 


“Very well,” said he, as he departed and continued his journey. 


When he had gone a long ways, “I wonder why my grandmother 
warned me away from this place?’’ he thought. . - 

He turned in that direction. Presently, when it was almost noon, he 
saw someone sitting on a knoll. He was going to walk on, leaving the 
place to one side, when the other arose, in the very direction toward which 
he had turned. Although he tried not to go there, yet he landed in that 
direction. At last he went up the hill where he saw the other. There he 
saw that that man was very ugly, hunchbacked and small, and clad in a 
bearskin coat; this man came to meet him, and as he came, had a fit of 
coughing, and said to him: “Fisherskin-Hat, you always were coming 
here to play!” he told him; “Of old, ‘He will go about engaging in contests,’ 
was said of you, you know!” . 

“It is not going about to engage in contests I am,” he told him. . 
to ino don’t say that! Only do let us have a contest!” the other said 

im. 

“No!” he answered him. 4 , ; 

. “Do you see that clump of trees right over there, where the smoke 1s 
rising?’ se 

PY og? 

“Very beautiful are the two young women who live there. They will 
be the prize,” the other told him. 

“Oh, nol’’ he said to him. 

“Oh, please do let-us wrestle!” the other said to him. 

At last he said, “Yes,” to him. 


2 


-, 133 

Then he put down his blanket-robe and his arrows, and all his clothes; 
only his hat he did not put down. 

“Ho, set down your hat, too,” the other told him. 

- “Oh dear, no!” . + 

So then they wrestled. He could not overcome him. At last, just 
as he was getting out of breath, he tripped the other and threw him; he 
got him down. 

“Ho, Fisherskin-Hat, I stumbled over your leg, that is why you have 
got the, better of me. Once more!” the other said to him, 

“Qh no! I have beaten.you now,” he answered the other. 

“No; once more!” 

“Very welll!” ; _ so 

_ They wrestled. While they were at grips, the other knocked his hat 
up jnto the air. Thereupon the other overcame him; he broke his back 
and entered his hody, taking away his good looks. ‘As he had seen the 
other to look, such was now the appearance of that youth. And that other, 
who had been ugly, was now handsome. When he looked at him, “Greatly 
has he injured me ag to my good looks, robbing me thus of my beauty!” 
thought he. ; 

The other took his clothes and put them on, and his hat as well. 
hi “These here are your clothes, Bearskin-Breeches!” the other told 

im. 

Then he put on the other’s clothes. And now he, instead of the other, 
was. incessantly coughing. Well, he had not followed his grandmother's 
advice. 

“Well now, Bearskin-Breeches, let us go take our wives!’ the other 
told him. 

So they set out to go to those young women. When they were near 
the place, out came the elder sister. 

She saw them and at once cried out, “Little sister! Come out! Here 
are these young men coming!” 

When that young woman came out, there she saw them walking up. 

“Come, little sister, let us see who gets there first! Whichever runs 
the faster, let her have the handsome one for her husband,” said the elder 
sister. 

“Very well,’”’ said the younger. . 

The woman started to run. Whenever her younger sister was about 
to pass her, she seized hold of her and flung her back; in the end that 
elder sister grabbed hold of the handsome youth saying, ‘This one I 
shall wed!” 

But it was the younger woman who was handsome. 

. Then, “There’s your husband!” they said to the younger one, point- 
ing to the hunchback who had a cough. 

‘They took the men home with them. When they entered the lodge, 
the one who had the cough took his seat yonder by the doorway. But the 
handsome youth, whose wife kept hugging and kissing him, thought it 
very fine. There they dwelt, and those women had only berries to eat. 
At last night came, as they sat there. ©. 2 1 6 6 te ee ee 


134 


Morning came. In the morning, when they got up, when they had 
eaten, the handsome one went out to go hunting. On his way out, he 
kicked the hunchback. 

_ “Why are you sitting like that, Bearskin-Breeches? Didn’t you know 
we sere staying at our wives’?” 

Qn his way out he upset him with a kick, so that he reeled about and 
coughed. 

When he arose, he said to his wife, “Bring me a rawhide rope.” 

She gave him a little leather thong. Thereupon he left the house, 
coughing as he went, to go a-hunting, he too. - 

“T can’t imagine what he will kill!” said the older sister of her brother- 
in-law. 

So all day they hunted. At nightfall the handsome man arrived. 
His booty turned out to be one otter. Meanwhile he who had the cough 
did not arrive. 

At last, when it was dark, “Did you not see him anywhere?” the one 
asked her husband. 

“No; I did not see him at all. I daresay he will be freezing to death 
somewhere!” he answered her, for it wag winter-time. 

After some time, there came the other, leaning on a stick; at last he 
arrived, 

“Why, he really has come!” said the elder sister. 

When he entered, he took his seat there by the door, and handed his 
wife the rawhide. When the young woman Pulled at it, in she pulled a 
partridge or a prairie-chicken. 

This was what the elder sister had anid: ‘when her husband brought 
the otter: “Sister, we shall not invite each other to eat. Whatever our 
husbands kill we shall eat,’”’ she had told her sister, for she thought that 
her sister’s husband would not succeed in,killing anything. 

_ So now, accordingly, they did not share their food, but the handsome 
man and his wife ate the otter. And the younger sister and her husband 
ate the partridge. So in time they went to bed. . . 

; And again, when day broke and they got up, the handsome} man ‘went 
out to hunt. Again he kicked the other. 

' “Why are you sitting like that?) Didn’t you know we were newly 
married, Bearskin-Breeches?” he said to him, kicking him over, so that he 
coughed as if he were going to die, the elder’ sister meanwhile laughing and 
laughing at her brother-in-law being kicked about. The latter, too, went 
off to hunt. All that day he tramped about. When night fell, again the 
handsome man arrived; again he brought an otter. 

“Hey, now my big brothers will rejoice, when they. get these otter- 
skins for hats!” said the elder sister. 

When it was entirely dark, then came the other a-coughing. 

“Well, well, well, there he j ig again!” she said of her brother-in-law, 
for she abhorred him. 

When he entered and had taken his seat, he handed his wife the raw- 
hide rope. 


“I suppose, another partridge!” said the elder sister. 


Steet * 


135 


_ When the woman pulled at it, into the lodge she drew a beaver. 
“Splendid, splendid! Now I shall have good eating!” said that young 
woman. oS 
When she skinned it and cut it up, it was very fat; and she cooked it, 
cooking also half of the tail. . . 
_, This is what the elder sister said: “Little sister, give me part of that ~ 
tail to eat; let me, too, have something good with my meal!” she asked 
er. 
No! ‘Whatever our husbands kill, we shall eat,’ you said not long 
ago.’ . 
Then she envied her sister the heaver which she was eating. 


* * * *° * * * * * * * * * * * * * * 


So they slept. In the morning, when they got up, they ate again. 
When they had eaten, the handsome young man again made ‘ready to go 
hunting. On his way out of the lodge, he kicked the other. 

‘Why are you sitting there like that? Didn’t you know we are staying 
at our wives’ house?” he said to him. 

He kicked him headlong. The elder sister laughed at what was done 
to her sister’s husband. ; 

Then, when he got up from where he lay, “Bring me a leather thong,” 
he told her. - 

. And so, when he was given it, he too went hunting. 
“Come, sister, don’t forget we are newly married; we must fetch 


~wood,” said the elder sister to the younger. : 


So they fetched firewood, and hauled the faggots. 

When it was noon, ‘Let us stop and eat,” said the young women. 

Then they cooked; they prepared their food, the younger woman 
roasting some beaver-flesh. The elder envied her for it. 
» Phe said to her: “Sister, do tear off a part for me. Let me too eat a 

it of it.” . : 

“Pshaw! So that is the way of it! You have a husband too, and he 
has killed an otter, and you can eat it. ‘We shall each eat separately,’ you 
said, whenggou thought of my husband, ‘He won’t be able to kill anything,’ ” 
she told her: 

“Nonsense! I was teasing you, sister!’ she answered her. 

“Never mind! I shall not by any chance give you any,” she told her 
elder sister. ; 
«. Then, of those two who were hunting, at nightfall the handsome one 
arrived. He brought two otters. When it was quite dark, Bearskin- 


’ Breeches came a-coughing. When he came into the lodge, he handed his _ 


wife ‘the leather rope. 
She said to him, “What sort of a treat is he bringing me,now?”’ said 
that-young woman. 
| « When she pulled at it, she drew two beavers into the house. 
' “Splendid! Now I shall save up these tails for my father and. mother 


“to eat!” she said. ““Come, sit over here,” she told him, pointing to where 
she had neatly arranged her part of the tent. 


“Oh, no!’ said Bearskin-Breeches, disgusted with his own person. 
“Please sit bere!’’ she told him. ; 


t 


136 


At last he took his seat there, while that young woman by the doorway 
skinned and cut up the beavers. When she had finished them, she cooked 
a meal, she coaked beaver-flesh. f- 

Thus apdke.the elder sister: “Little sister, rive me one tail,” she said 
to her, 3%" 

—{————— <““Pshaw, Hust-yotl edt the tails of the things your husband killed!” 
she told her elder sister, and would not give her any. 


a Only they had good meat'to eat; for the otters which the handsome 
man had killed were not fat. Then, in time, when they had finished their 
meal, when darkness had fallen, they went to bed... ...-... 


So they slept. In the morning, when they got up, and had eaten 
again, the handsome one rose to his feet without delay, for he was angry 
that Bearskin-Breeches had outdone-him every time in hunting. Again, 
on his way out of the lodge, he kicked the other. 


He said to him, “Why are you sitting there like that? Don’t you 
‘know we are staying at our wives’? ” he said to him, kicking him headlong, 
as he left the lodge. . 


“Bring me a leather rope,” he said to his wife. 
When she had given it to him, he too went out to hunt. 


When he was far off, he spoke as follows: “It can’t be, cain it, that 
he robbed me of my hunting power-when he took away my good looks?” 
said Bearskin-Breeches. 


So be went from there, on snowshoes, a8 always, and presently he 
saw some dwarf moose. He killed two cows, very fat ones.- Then he went 
home, dragging the two. Preséntly, late in the evening, the handsome 
man arrived. He brought a young bull of the dwarf moose; it, was by no 

we 


an 


means a good specimen. 
Then, after nightfall, the young, vyoman went out p£doors, thinking 
-of her husband, “It seems he is not’coming home on tipie.” 
. “Tt really seems as if that person who has just gone out were lonesome 
for her husband!” said the elder sister, snééring at.thé younger- 


By and by, as the young woman stood outside there, she heard some- 
one far off who came singing. She was glad that he was singing. Oh, very 
quickly he came near, as he sang. She.went indoors, thinking, “It is he!’ 
of her husband, and heated her cooked food, while he quickly came with 

> noise, but now of coughing. : ~ 


“Taugh! He’s back!’ exclaimed the elder sister, for truly she felt 


disgust at thé thought of her sister's husband. 


‘When he came in, he handed her the rawhide. When the young 
woman tugged at it, she could not get it in. Bearskin-Breeches got up; 
when he drew it in, into the tent’ he pulled two dwarf moose. 

“Splendid! Now I-shall haye two skins of dwarf moose!” she said. * 

Then she sat down, taking some pretty moccasins, and put them on 
her husband’s feet. 

_. “Fie, she, is even putting her fancy-work moccasins on his feet!” she 
said of her younger sister. 7 


137 


i 
“Why, even you are in the habit of putting moccasins on your husband’s 
feet, when he doesn’t kill anything good!” ; 

Then, when they had eaten, the young woman set about her. butcher- 
ing. When she had cleaned the animals, they went to bed and.slept. In 
the morning, when they had got up and breakfasted, the handsome man 
went out, angry because, when he tried to hunt, Bearskin-Breeches kept 
outdoing him. He went straight out of the tent. . 

Then said that young woman, “‘Hoho, how now? Did not he always 
use to kick him as he went out? He must be ashamed at being outdone!’’ 
she called to him, ; 

Then Bearskin-Breeches, too, got ready and went hunting, and after 
a while he was far off. Presently, in the afternoon, he saw spme moose. 
He killed some, and dragged them home. . And the handsome man killed 
one deer, 2 male; that was very lean. At nightfall he arrived. The elder 
sister was very glad: when she saw the deer. 

“Splendid! {Now we can use it for moccasins!” she said. 

. When at last it was quite dark, the younger sister went outside, ard 
then she heard someone who came a-singing. And quickly he came near 
with his song, while she stood there and listened with pleasure to him who 
sang. When he had come near, she went inside; it seems that it was 
Bearskin-Breeches’ snowshoes that always came singing. When he came 
in, he handed her the rawhide. When she tugged at it, she could not 
manage it; then Bearskin-Breeches drew in two moose. 

. “Splendid! Truly, I am glad that we can have moccasins from one, 

and my father and my brothers from the other!” she said. ‘ 

The elder sister now spoke not at all, as her husband was outdone. 

Then the young woman with zeal prepared her husband’s food. When 


.. they had eaten, the young woman skinned and cut up the game: look you, 


those moose were fat. 

“Little sister,’ said the elder, “Give me one of those leg-bones; let 
me eat the marrow,” she. asked her. ~ : 

“Oho, so that is where we are! I certainly shall not give you any; 
you hate your brother-in-law here; anything he has killed cannot possibly 
taste good,”’ she told her sister. 

‘~ Then in time it was night. . Finally they went to bed. When morning 
came, and they had eaten breakfast, again they went hunting. 

Thus spoke Bearskin-Breeches: ‘Bring your rawhide rope,’’ he told 
his wife. , - 

As he hunted, when he was far off, he killed a very fat bear. And the 
handsome man killed a bull buffalo. This time too, the buffalo was not 
fat. They always dragged home entire whatever they killed; so now, in 
the evening, there came the handsome man, who had killed a bull buffalo. 
And when it was all dark, there came Bearskin-Breeches, and entered the 
tent. .The young woman was happy as soon as he came in. When she 
pulled at the rawhide rope, she could not manage it. . 

She said, “What new treat has my husband in store for me?”’ 

“Tor shame,” the elder one cried at once; ‘She even goes so far as to 
speak of him as ‘husband’!’’ she said. 


“Well, and certainly there is no reason why I should not call him so, - 


seeing that he always makes good killings for me!” said the younger, for 
Bearskin-Breeches’ wife loyed him. ‘ 


a2 7% 


- 


138 
When he drew it in, he brought i in a bear. 


“Splendid!” cried the young woman; “Truly, my father will be very . 
ry 


glad,\that I am to have plenty of fat, of bear’s-fat!”” she said. 
en first she put moccasins on her husband’s feet. Then she gave 
is meal, and they ate, and all the while the elder sister kept watching 
e younger, ‘because she envied her the good things she was eating. ‘When 
they had eaten, they cleaned the game. When they had cleaned it, it was 
‘dark night. Then they went to bed. 

Bearskin-Breeches spoke as follows: “Now,” he said to his wife, 
“tomorrow he and I shall not hunt,’ he told her, “but we shall take a 
steam-bath,” he told her; “You have done well by yourself’ in not dis- 


daining me, ‘n he told her; “This is not the way I really look; the way your. — 


sister’s husband there appears, that is. the way I really look, for he has 
taken my good looks from me, overcoming me by treachery. But the way 
T now appear is really his bodily form,” he told her; ‘“Moreover he is greatly 
defiling my garments which he is wearing. Tomorrow prepare'a hut for 
the steam-bath. Only thus shall I overcome him,” he told her; “Right 
outside here, close by, I saw a large stone,” he told her; “You will heat it. 
And this bear’s-fat you will use to cover the hut. Also in a bowl you will 
melt fat, you will prepare fat. for me to pour on the stone,’ he told her; 
‘When we are in the steam, and he feels thé heat, and says, ‘Open up p 
then pay him no heed; and if your sister starts to open the hut, hold her 
fast,”’ he told her. 

“Very well,” said the young woman. 

So then they. went to sleep. 

-In the morning, when they had got up and eaten, Bearskin-Breeches 
spoke: ‘Brother-in-law!” he said to the other. 

“What is it?’ 

“Let us not hunt now. Let us rest a while; you must, be tired,” he 
said to him. 

“Yes, I am tired,” said he. -: - - aT 

“If we took a steam-bath, the heat would refresh us,” he said to him. 

“Yes, I should very much like to take a steam-bath, ” said he. 


At once the elder sister said, “You shall not.take a steam-bath; you 
will get too dirty, and Sweaty in the heat,’? she said to her husband. 

“Yes, but I am tired. Do let me takeva steam-bath,” he said. 

Accordingly, when they had eaten, the young woman went out and 
built the hut for the steam-bath, and made a fire, 

When she went to get that ‘large stone, she walked round it and said 
to it, “Stone, be light for me!’* 

Big as it was, She mazaged to lift it and take it back with her; that 
was the stone which she heated. When the stone was hot, she covered the 
hut With fat underneath, bear’s-fat, and with their blanket-robes on the 
outside. Then she prepared the grease with which he was to sprinkle the 
stone. 

‘ “Now I have finished, husband,” she told him. 

“Now then, brother-in-law, we were going to take a steam-bath, you 

know!’ he said to the other. 


. “Goodness!” cried the elder sister; “No! You are too likely to take " 
out my husband instead of yours, my handsome husband!’’ she said to her 


sister. 


4 


- 139 4 


“Nonsense! How could I want to exchange my husband for Yours, 
my husband who is a good hunter?” she answered her. 
“Sister-in-law,” said Bearskin-Breeches, “tie a rawhide rope to kour 


husband; then you can hold fast to the rope, so that your husband shall 


not be taken from you.” . ne 
“Very well!” 


\, 
Thereupon they took off their clothes and went into the structure. 


where they were to take the steam-bath. Then the elder sister really did 
tie somethi jround. her husband’s waist by which to hold him on the 
line, i in her féar that she would be robbed of him. Then they closed them 
in tightly. 


Then Bearskin-Breeches spoke, saying, “Now, because I am weary I : 


am taking a steam-~bath, but, besides, I hate the way I now look!” he 
said; “Let me have back my good looks!” he said, as he poured fat on the 
stone. ° i : ; 
The handsome youth felt too hot. 
He,said, “Open it up! I am hot!” he cried. 
That young woman paid no heed. He sprinkled the stone all the more. 
He cried all the more, ‘Open it up! I am too hot!” 
‘The young woman paid no heed to his noise. 
He cried, “Wife, open it up!” to her. 
When she wanted to open it, the younger sister held the elder back. 
- “Gét away! My husband is being scalded!” she said to her. ° 
. She paid no heed to her elder sister, but held her firmly. 
At last Bearskin-Breeches said, ‘‘There, wife, now open it!” 

"By this’ time he had taken away the other’s comely appearance, and 
regained his former good looks. When the elder sister opened the hut for 
him, it was that Bearskin-Breeches whom she was holding on the rawhide 
thong. 


: “to el” 

“Oh, no!” the handsome young man told her; “This person here is: 
. your husband, my sister-in-law, who: had robbed me of my good looks. But 
now I have:had enough of his defiling my clothes and my headgear,” he 
said. 

It seemed as though he wer¢ even handsomer than before; the young 
woman was very glad to see her husband looking like that. The elder 
sister wept because her husband. wasugly. She paid no attention to him, for 
he coughed incessantly, and was hunchbacked, but she stood to one side 
and wept 

“Why are you. weeping, sister-in-law? “You might be kissing your 
husband, you know! At least give him a kiss!” he said to her. 

She would not kiss her husband, for he disgusted her, and -she kept 
weeping. — 

“Little sister, please let: me have your husband!” she begged her. 


“Oh, no! It is my brother-in-law who is your husband!” she told her.:,, 
Then, when that youth gave his clothes a good shaking, they weré* 


“Dear me, sister, it seems our husbands have changed places as to the 


pretty again. Then they put on their clothes, and when that Bearskin- _ 


Breeches had put on his, he departed; for he did not like his wife’s disdain. 
He went away. But’ the other stayed there. Then that younger sister 
. was very happy. 


140 
“Truly, I did well by myself when I did not scorn you!” she said to 
her husband. 


Then the elder sister said to her, “Little sister, do let me be married to 


_your husband!” 

“No! My brother-in-law was disgusted with you,” she told her. | 
Then they ceased. He went hunting every day, and chased buffalo, 
~ and brought them home entire; in time they had much food., Presently 
toward spring, they had a child; a little boy. Then, when he thought 
that they had too, much food, he no longer hunted every day. Then at one 
time, as he went to an outlook, there were two youths, ‘coming that way. 
He went hack. 

As he entered the tent, “Ho, two youths are walking hither!””‘he said. 

“Dear me, those must be my brothers!’’. was what she said. 

Thereupon: that woman began cooking, for she thought, “My brothers 
shall eat.” 


- There, when those young men came into view of the Place, they beheld — 


a great amount of meat hanging outside the tent. 
“Splendid!” was what they said as they approached; “pray, I am 
glad to see things like this!” they said. ° 
When they reached the ‘Place, “Hello, come in!”’ he said to his brothers- 
in-law. ; 
» When they entered, “Hoho!” they liked their brother-in-law’ 8 looks. 
But one of their sisters had no hushand at all. 
“Hey,” said the one, “Why is it that one has not a husband?” 


“Oh, why, this sister of yours did have a husband, but her hushand . 


went away; he took a dislike to her after a time. She-was married quite a 


while, but the man was not really.much of a provider of game. Perhaps 


you know him: his name is-Bearskin-Breeches.”’ 

“Heavens, yes! Bow we had that. person for a brother-in-law!” the one 
answered him. 

Those young men were ashamed that such a looking man had been 
their brother-in-law... 

. They spoke as follows: “Today, at ‘nightfall, our father will camp 
-here, for we are moving camp to this place,-on account of great famine; 
because our father knew, after all, that you were here, brother-in-law, is 
why we are moving camp this‘way. This, in fact, was our father’s thought, 


-when he came and left my sisters here, for, ‘Perhaps some man or men will — 


not disdain them and marry them, and then kill something in the way of 
game,’ was what our father thought, ” said those youths; ‘He will be 
very glad, when he sees the way things are,” the-one told him. 

‘ The young women were glad that their father was coming with his 
camp. ‘Then really, in time, came the. sound of their’ father’s speech, as 
he came in sight. . 

Fle gaid, “Surely that is all meat!” he said; “And here was I starving!” 
he said, and out went that young woman, saying to her father, ‘Yes, 
meat, indeed!” - 

The old man gave thanks, for he was glad, and then, “This was what 


I had in mind, my children, a8 my reason for coming and leaving you in 


‘this place,” he told his children. 


“s ; _ 141 

Then the young woman went out of doors and ‘said, “But as to these 
my stores of meat, whichever you think is the best, father, by it pitch 
your tent,” she said to him. | 

Then by the best stores of meat, there his cbildren cleared away the 
snow. 
“Now, my men,” he.said to the others; “Camp wherever you like the 
look of the meats,” he told the people. 

So then they pitched camp. Thereupon he went and: entered his 
daughter’s tipi, to see his son-in-law. There he beheld also his grandson, 
who by now was quite a Jad: he took him and kissed him again and again. 
He was very glad. All the people were glad. They continued to stay , 
there for a long time, until their son was big. 2 

Then at one time the old man spoke thus: “Daughter, do you never 
hear my son-in-law say that any of his relatives are alive?” 

“To be sure, he often speaks of his father and mother, and ways, “Tt 
is a long time since I left them’.” 

“Yes; so there, daughter; surely ‘my son-in-law’s father and. his wife 
must be lonesome. You, had_better go there; do’ you now, in.turn, take 
eare of your husband’s mother and father,” he told his daughter; “Tam 
sufficiently well off now, so long ag I eat the things my son-in-law has 
killed,” he told her. 

“Very well, I will tell him this,” his daughter said to him. 


When she went home, she said to-her husband, “ ‘Go you to my:son-_ 


in-law’s father,’ is what my father says,’’ she told him, 
_ “Very well, tomorrow we shall depart. No doubt they are in want; 
after all, it is a long time since I left them to come here,” he answered her. 

Accordingly, when day broke, they made ready for his departure, and 
truly, all the people bade them ‘farewell. So they departed, and when 
they had camped twice on the way, they came in sight of his people’s home 
to which they were going. 

“Here, I shall run ahead; I ghall go tell my father that we are about. _ 
to arrive,” he said to her. 

“Very well.” 

Then he ran on.. When he got there, behold, he saw nothing at all 
of things to eat. 

When he entered the lodge, there sat his father and his mother; 
“Splendid! Our son has come!’’ they cried, as they greeted him, and his 
mother wept for no reason at-all, except that she was so glad to see hin. , 

And.so they gave thanks. 


ah 


“Now, close by on her way hither is a woman who has come here with 


me, and also your grandchild,” he told them. 

The old man spoke his thanks. 

“Oh, I must!’ exclaimed the old woman, and went-out of the lodge, 
to go meet her daughter-in-law and her grandchild. When she met her, 
' she kissed her. 

17 My daughter-in-law!” shé said to her; “Give me my grande shild!””, 
she said to her. «. 

The other gave her the child, and him ‘too she -kissed many times, 
Then they left that. spot and ‘went on, and she carried her grandchild. 


When they arrived; and she took him into the house, at once the old man" 


$3186—10 © 


142 


called his grandson, and kissed him repeatedly. So then they stayed there, 
and the young man always hunted, and the young woman, worked hard, 
taking care of her parents-in-law. She was very kind to them and took- 
good care of her mother-in-law and of her father-in-law. 


And this is the end of the story, of the sacred story. That is all. 


(19) Wampum-Head and His Nephews | 
Coming-Day : 


ha-kistkaw-pihtukdw. 


_ pdyak otinaw Gh-misak, kayas dsa dh-motutstk. dkusi awa iskwaw 
dh-ukiméunt, piydsiw-iskwdw, nopatd blinaw éh-tipdyihtahk, dkwah napata , - 
itinaw ah-tipiyihtahk dwako ukimiw malihkan; napdw dok6. utoskini- 
kKimiuawa dh-astudtulstk, Gh-méitawilsik, éh-manitéwi-mdlawdtsik, piiyak 
siyakotsthihtsih, dkust uwitsiwdkanah dh-nipahimtht, dh-mowimiht, ékust - 
piku ‘dh-métutsik’ tsiyihkdtiw. nandtuhk, oki arisiyiniwak kd-itudhk, 
nandluhk pisiskiwak dyokunik. dkus G6k6. _ . 

ékwah awa ‘makihkan k-okimawit, dkutah uhtsi pdyak uskinikiskwéw, 

; usimisah, napdsisah éh-apisisisiyit, d-kitimakdyimat, d-sakihdl, ohtauiya 
“. ukdutya kutakah witsisdna kahkiyaw Gh-nipahimiht, wiyawad piku nisu 
d-pimitisitsik usimisa, Gmis idyihtam: “ nika-sipudhlin ; nisimix awa 
maskits vih-pimdlisitsth,” Gh-itdyihtahk ; “usdm kitimakisiw, dh-apisisis- 

- it,” iiythtam ; “ hdw, anuhts ka-tipiakak,. mistahi ta-mayi-kisikéw ! ta- 
mispun 1" itwiw: “ nika-sipwéhtin, aka ta-kiskdyimikawiyan ita ka- 
wth-ituhtdydn. "’ dchusi itdéyfihtam. . 

- - tapwii, dhl’ piskak, mistahi mayi-kisikdw, dh-mispuhk. dkwah miywiy- - 
thiam aw Gskinikiskwiw. mayaw mistah déh-tipiskak, wawdyiw, vikiwdw 
th-muanisahk, ispimihk itah éh-maydtahk ch-wiipinahk, dkwah utandskdnah, 
ulakohpah, kahkiuaw ta-kih-dpatsihtat kikwayoh utinam, dh-kisitwawéyil, 
mustuswaydn dkutah thewiutkahmtahk utsaydnisah. dkus ist d-sipuihtiiw, , 
Gh-uldpdt oh blsaydnisah, Wipiskots nipakitapandsk, dkus ist th-utdpil, 


akuah usimisah dh-nayomdt. 
mayi-lisikdyiw, déh-pimuhtat. 


kistkdyiw: iyikuhk dh-utdkusth, dkuyikuhk asta-kistkdw. 


si mistahé mdyt-kisikdyiw. kapd-tipisk 
piyisk wapaniyiw ; dhtst pikuh mayi- | 
Ghist pikuh 


. pinuhlin.. piyis ipiskdw. dkuluh dkwoh"kapdsiw. nama kékway mitstw, 
y tikutah dhmapat. dytkuhk éhasdpaniyik, mina sipwihtiw. dh-wipaniyth, 
dkuak maluyiwa usimisa, Ghenbhlékaldyit. dkust nitsawdls waudyiw, d- 


ee nalpuahlal; 


dytkuhk Gh-miskahk itah Gh-ayapdskwayayik, Gkutah pdayals 


imistah Gh-wakdyik, dkutah ituhtiw, dh-nandlawdpahtahk, “ itah d-miywasil 


_ itawikiyan,” Gh-atdythtahk. 
-) i ndpmiyik; wasukdm mistah dh-sakdytk. Gkutah kapdésiw. panaham, dkutah 
i G-wth-uikiu ; ékujak kutawdw. ahisi pikuh wdtuyiwa usimisah, d-nohtahka- 


tapwi miskam sakahk dy-ihkatawaytk, éh- 


: téyit. G-Lih-kutawit, dkwah usihlaw é-wih-lapakwit. a 
eof lapud Gh-ninayit usimisa, lapakwéw, “ maskots wapus nipahakth,” ; 
+} dh-ildythtak ; “Inisimis cka-mowd,” ch-tdyihtahk. & 


i Gkwah mihtah éh-utinahk, dkubgh k-otinahk mihtah, tapasiyiwa aku 
, uhist wipuswah, dyakunih tapakwdsuyiwa péyak. nipahiw. 


ah 
Me, 


“hay hay ! ékwah nisimia kd-mitsisut 1” idythtam. , ; 
‘ - Kiwihtahéw ; iydyaw usihdw, G-uih-lasiswat, d-wih-asamdt usimisah, 
- dhusi éh-kisisudl, péktipayiyiwa ustmisa. dkust dyakuni asamiw. dkwah 4. 


a 


a 


143 


wiya pasikéw, Gh-dwatét mihtah, d-wih-usihiat wikiwdw. piyis mistahih 
ulinam mistikwah. ikuyikuhk wih-madtuyiwa usimisah, ékwah dé-nahapis- 
tawdt, dh-kakitsihadt. dkwah dkutah ay-aydw. tyikuhk Gka éh-matuyit dsay, 
usthiaw wikiwaw, maskusiyah éh-manisahk, dyakunih mina éh-apahkwét 


utkiwahk, mina dh-andskat. dkuyikithk d-with-tipiskék, Gsay t-dsi-kiséwayik ~ 


dy-isthtal wikth, dkwah pihtukahiw usimisa, dkwah dh-kutawdt -pihtsaythk. ~ 


mwthisth éh-pahkisimuytk, kdh-matwé-ma-mawimuyit wdpuswah, ituhléw : 
polth pdéyak. nipahdw. miywiyihtam. 

“ ékusi namuya ta-nohtéhkatéw nisimis,” ttéythtam. 

ay-apiw. 4 

dkwah d-tipiskdyik, ma-mitundyihtam, “ pitand aka uhtsih awiyak 
miskawit 1” dy-ttiyihtahk; “kahkiyaw aryistyintwak dkus is dyadwak 
dtuké ?” dh-itéyihtahk ; ité k-dh-ituhtét chi ayisiyiniwah kay-téusiyit, 


kd-néh-nipahituytt, dh-métuyit, “ dkust dtukd. kutakak mina is dydwak ?”- 


Gy-tléythtahk, dyaku uhtst k-oh~itwat. 

lapwd miywdyihtam ah-payakut, “ dkust maskéts nk-ohpikihdw nisi-~ 
mis,” Gh~itéyihtahk. 

Gkutah tahtu-kisikaw mihtah dh-utinahk, mina éh-tapakwét dh-miht- 
sitiylt wipuswah, tapwd tdpiskdyikih, kah-nipdtsth, wiydpahk* éh-ndtat 
_ wipuswah, mitunt miywdythtam mah-mihtsdét ch-nipahdt. piyisk usthtaw 
wiyawitimthk itah d-wih-akulat wapuswah, usém mihtsdt dh-nipahdt. 

“haw, dkus dtsik oma aka mayaw kd-noéhidhkatdyahk nisimis !” 
itéythtam. 

nama kékway kutak atuskdiam, naydstaw Gh-tapakwdt dkwah mihtah ih- 
ulinahk, dkutah, uma k-dy-ayat, “ piten dma éka@ uhisth miskat awiyak {” 
ah-tliythtahk. 

Kitahtawd dkwah, kinwdsk itah dh-ayat dkwah, usimisah akwah misik- 
itiyiwa, dkwah usihtaw alsusisah, usimisah dy-usthtawal, é-wih-kakwé- 
nihtah-pimutahkwéhdt. tapwi piyiske nihtah~pimutahkwdyiwa ;  piyisk 
nakalsihiaw kdkway. ta-wih-kakwé i-mipahat awa napdsis. kitahtawd sakahk 
Ghepapdmuhtdt awa nipisis, wipamiw winuswah, é-wih- hakwa-nipahat, 
lipwi nipahiw. ha, mijwityihtam, Gh-pihiukahat. 

“hay hdy 1” itwéw ay, ‘uskinikiskwaw ; “ dhus dlsik-ani aka kd-hih- 
nipahdéhkatusuydhk, dsay dh-nipahat nisimis wapusuah, ” itéyihiam. 

dkwah taépwé hutaleah usthtdwatsusisth, nawats dh-misayikih, “ kékway 
tsi oh-miya-nipalat, ” ” dy-tldythtahk. . sguiyisk Gh-kisthlét, dkwah dyakunih 
ih-apalsihtal awd nadpdsis, tapwd mah-mihtsdt nipahdw wapuswah, aGkuwah 
aw iskudw-pikunam apdhku:dsun, dy-usihtat usima ‘tsit-dldsiyil, mina t- 
oskulakayit. dkwah kikéts uskinihiw awa napdsis. mistahit miyusiw awa 


napisis. Gkwah dkutah 6m dh-ay-aydlsik, kitahtawé wapuswaoh d-wih- 


kakui-wépamdl, é-papdmuhtat, kah-matahat piyak apisi-mosusah. 
“kikway awa?” tléythtam ; “ mahtth nika-kakwé-wépamaw, ” itéyth- 
tam. . 
Kitahtawd ké-wapaméat, 
“ kékway awa?” itéyihtam ; “ mahtih ka-kth-nipahak, " ttéyihtam. 


. 


tdpwd pimwdse. 5 tapwd nipahdw. dh-utihtat, namuya nisilawéyimaw 


kikwayah ohi. 


tam. 
_ kiwéhtahéw, ah-utapa, dh-takuhtahat wikiwahk. ; 
1», 186~104 


* mahtih niko Knodhtahaw ; _mahtith kd-nisitawdyimadt nimis " ttdéyth- 


-144 


_“ nimisd, matsikotsiian kikwayah awa?" itéw. 
th-wayawit aw éskinikiskwéw, simak nisitawiyimaw. 

“hay hay ! dkwah kd-miyu-mitsisuyahk, nisimis | .apst-mésus awa,” 
ittk. “hah 1” 

miywdaythtam, , 

“ dkwah dwakunih kiy-umaskisinit nisimis,” ttwaw aw uskinikiskwaéw, 
dh-wiyinthat. . 

lipwé dyakunith mowdéwak ékwah, dkust nama kékway dkwah wiyah 
lapakwdw aw iskwdw ; ayis ustma ékwah ndh-nipahdyiwa wapuswa. tapwd 
bhi usihdw aw iskwdéw, d-wth-utsit-dmaskisiniyit' ustma. dh-kith-nipdtsik, 
Gh-waépahk, Gh-waniskdt aw uskinikiskwdw, dsay namwdts nipdyiwa usima, 
Gh-matsiyit. th-pénth-dpihtd-kisikak, dsay usimah takuhtdyitwa; nisu 
apisi-mésusah pdsiwdytwa. 

“hay hay!” ttwéw aw uskinikiskwéw ; “ dkus dtsik 6ma aka ké-lith- 
nohtihkatdyahk !" itayihtam ; “ dyakuni nisimis dkwah t-étdstw,” idyth- 
tam, . 

dkust d-kth-kisi-wiyininihadt, dkwah tydyaw asamdw usima. nama 
wiya wihkdts dkwah kituttk usima, usm aéh-népdéwisiyit ta-kitutikut, dkwah 
Gh-uskinikiyit2 tapwdé mina ch-wapaniyik, kiksépad déh-waniskat, sdsay 
dsah ké-sipwaéhtayit usima, ch-mdtsiyit, ékuah wiya ohi tydyaw apisi-mésus- 
waydnah dy-usthat, mitdsah d-wih-usihtdt. dh-utdkusiniyik, dh-kisthat, 
apisi-misuswayanah, kd-tokusiniyit usima. dsay mina nisu pdsiwdyiwa 
apsi-mésusah, miywdythtam aw uskinikiskwdw. piyis mina tipiskdyiw.. 
Gkuyikuhk Gh-kist-atuskdladt 6h apisi-mésuswaydnah, éh-pdswat. dkusi 
tdpiskayikih ch-kaskikwésut, usima dy-usthtuwdt ayowinisah. 

piyisk mina mustuswah nipahdyiwa pdyak, ch-pdsiwdyit, “ likway 
dtukd ?” Gheitdyihtahk aw 6skinikiw. : 

aw O6skinikiskwéw céh-wapamat, “ hay hay hay !” itwiw; “ dkwah 
nisimis dwakunt kiy-utandskanit. ” ; 

dkust tidyihtam ; maka nama wihkdts dkwah pikiskwatitéwak, pikuh 
alsiyaw dh-kitapamat aw iskwéw usima, “ tapwé mistahi miyusiw nisimis, ” 
dhi-atdiyshiah ; “tépwi miywasin é-kih-pd-sipwahtahak nisim,” dy-iléyth-’ 
ahk. ; 

tahtu-kisikaw dh-mdtsit aw déskintkiw, pisisik mustuswa mah-misiwd 
Gh-pdtsitépdt, hah, mina mayaw piydsiwdtsih mustuswah, wiydpahkih dsay 
Gh-kisihdt aw iskwdw mustuswaydnah, dh-utandskanitsik, mina dh-utakuhpit- 
sik usime, kitahtawé kikisépad dh-waniskat aw iskwéw, hdydpits nipdyiwa 
usima, d-kiskiyimikut dh-kisi~paminawasut, waniskdyiwa. dkusi ékwah 
G-nitsisuisik. G-kisi-mitsisutsik, dkuyikuhk wayawiw aw dskinikiw, dh- 
_ nitawi-kiskatahwat asdméhtikwah, é-wih-usihdt asdma, mina éh-wanithikdt, 
nisu dy-usthidt wanithikanah. iyikuhk dh-takuhidt, Gh-wapahtahk aw iskwaw 
mistikwah dh-pihtukatayit, é-kih-asamat, dkwah ulinam ohi mistikwah aw 
iskwdw, Gh-tthkisahk.? dh-kisi-mitsisut aw dskintkiw, dh-méhkutahk, asdma 
Gy-usthat, dkuyikuhk kiskdyihtam aw iskwéw Gh-usthdyit asama. dkwah 
usihtaw 6ma pahkakin, d-wih-waskasahk aw iskwéw. tdpwi Gh-wapahk, 


‘The prefix wesit- is probably an error. ' 
_ 7 The tabu against naming and speech between brother and sister seems to have lost 
ite force on Sweet Grass; it is violated below in this story. The tabu is maintained on 
Star Blanket Reserve. . 

* If the verb is really téhkisam: “he melts it,” the object would seem to be the sticks. 


S145 


’ y 


dh-ntawépahtahk wwanihikanah, pdéyak tasdhéw kihiwa, dkwah pdyak 


nikikwa, * 

“ah tl” 

Gwakuni mikwanah kahkiyaw utindw. dkwah ohi kikiwa! pahkundéw 

aw iskwéw, &h~pdswat. 

“ maskéts d-wih-utastutinit nisim,”’ itdyihtam. 

piyisk dkwah usthdyiwa asdma. dh-kis-osthat, dkwah awa iskwiéw 
utinéw, éh-askimdtat uh dsama, dh-pdswat. dkust dh-kisi-paséyit, kiksdpa 
tytkuh mina ah-waniskdt, kayahtd maka mina namuya nipdyiwa usima, 
adsay ah-mdistyit, d-wih-dy-atuskdt wayawitimthk, pahkdkinwah dh-ay- 
usthiat,:“ dh-miywastk nik-dsthtan nikindn,” Gh-itdythtahk. iytkuhk éh- 
utadkusthk, wayawitimthk ah-nipawit, kikway Ra-pahtahk. Gh-niutahk, ptt 
kd-pd-nikamuyit awiya ; ttéythtam. ; 

“nistm dtukd,”’ idythtam. 

ch~pihtukdt, kiytpah dsay kistwak kd-pdtwdwitamiyit. kisiwak a&h-pdy- 
aydyit, kiskOwéyiwa. poétih usima kd-matwd-iakusiniyit. mihtah itah ah- 
astdytkth, dkutah éh-téhtsiwdpindyit utasdmiyiwa, ka-kitoyit. 

 Gydkunak distk okt kad-pd-nikamutsik [” itdythtam aw iskwdw. 

potih dh-wayawit, pisisik askdkin ka-pdtayit. dh-utindt, dh-wd-wapah- 
tahk, pot és iyapdyisah ké-wapamat, dskana ch-kikamuyjt, dkwah waska- 
siyiwa. dyakunth mah-maniswéw, uhpim d-ahat. askdkin min uma.qnih- 
tthk tdhtastaw. Whe 

“ d-wih-utakohpit dtukd,” itdythtam. ; a, 

Gskanah éhi minah uwaskasiyiwa pihtukahiw, Gh-ahdt. dkwah ah-kisi- 
mitsisut aw oskinikiw, utindw oh dskanah, iskutdhk tsik dkutah d&h-ahdt, 
d-wih-kdtsikwahahk anih éskanah. piyis kahkiyaw utinam anih dskanah. 
piyis kawisiméw. dh-wdpahk pdyakwanuhk apiw; namuya matsiw, éh- 
usthat dskanah. , 

ékwah aw iskwdw shi mustuswaydnah dh-usthat, dhwah, “ nohtéhk- 


. atdtukd 1” dy-itdyimat usima, Shtapiwinihk k-dh-pasikuytt usima. 


a 


dékusi dkutah, “ tandhk dtuké 2?” itéythtam. 

dékwah aw Oskinikiw d-kth-wih-kimutamawét umisah mikisisah. 

dkusi, “ kikway dtukd ?” itéyihtam aw iskwéw. ; 

piysk kisthéw oh dskanah aw usinikiw, min 6hi waskastyah. dh-tipiskak 
kisithdw aw itskwéw mustuswayanah, tyikuhk éh-wapahk, dkuythuhk kikamu- 
héw aw 6skinikiw th dskanah, min ohi waskastyitwa, d-wih-utakuhpit aw 
uskinikiw. 

dmis idw Omisa: “ nimisd, mikisisak tsi kitaydwadwak ch-wapiskisit- 
sik, dkwah d-askéhtakusitstk ?” ttdéw. 

, sc dha’ . ” , 

dkusi aw iskwdw ulindw, dh-ttisinamawdt. dkwah aw uskinikiw d- 
sikahut, ah-kisi-stkahut, Ghi mikisisah ch-pah~potatat, mah-mihtsdtiyiwa ka- 
wapiskisiyit ohi mikisisah Otah ustikwanthk, napaté wdstsakasah kahkiyaw 
d-tapiskahwat mikisisah, tapiskdts Gh-wipistikwandt napaté, dkwah napatd 
Shi k-askihiakusiyit mikisisah dhatamuyit ustikwanihk, ah-mikisistik- 
wand. dkwah tépwi miyusiw aw uskinikiw, uskutakay éh-pimikitéytk, 
sihkusiwayanaoh Gh-kikamuyit, mina uldsthk  dh-kikamuyikih,  dah- 
pimikitéyikih, min dkutah sthkusiwayanah Gh-kikamuyit, dkwah shi 
nikikwaydnoah dh-ulastutinit, utakuhpah adskanah dh-kikamuyit, dkwah 


1 Doubtless slip of the tongue for nikikwa; so translated. 


146 


waskasiyiwa dkutah dh-kikamuytt. dkwah tapwd. miyusiw aw 6skinikiw, 
Gkust ékwah Gh-kisi-nénapdtsihisut, -dkutah dkwah tahtu-kisikaw dkwah 
ah-matsit, tahtu-kisikaw péyak ah-nipahat mustuswah, piyis mistahi mitsiwin 
aydwak, — ae 

Kitahtawd kinwdésk dkwah itah ch-aydtsik, kitahtawé nama wiyah wih- 
matsiw aw uskinikiw, pdyakwanuhk dh-apit. iydtah-asamdtsi usimah, 
namuya wih-mitsisow aw dskiniw, tahk éh-kamwétapit. 

dmis itdyihtam aw iskwéw : “ kéhtsinah wisakéyihtam nisim,”’ itéyih- 
tam. 

piyisk niswkisikaw namuya ndntaw ituhtdw aw uskinikiw, tahkih ah- 
kamwdtaptt. 

kitahtawdé Omis itivw aw iskwéw: ‘a nistmis, dh-wisakdyihtaman tsi? 
kikaskdéythtamthin, dké dh-mitsisuyan, ’’ itéw. : 

“ namuya,” itwéw aw uskinikiw. 

dkusi namuya uthtamawdéw kékway. 

ah-wapahk, minah dh-waniskatsik, éh-kisi-mitsisutsik, “haw, nimisé, 
6ma k-dsinakustyan, k-dsihuydn, Gkusi -tst-dsindkusiw uskintkiw ; mina 
ulasdma dkusi ta~sindkusiyiwa. oma k-dpihta-kisikak, dhuté tit-ohtuhtéw 
uskinikiw. O6tah iskwahtémihk dkutah kit-Ghéw utasémah. ‘haw, niviki- 
makan, Gh-pd-natitin !’ kik-atik. dkus itiskih, dkdya kitulahkan. d-wih- 
pé-mawinihut dyakw awa uskinikiw," itiw umisah ; “ niwih-mdisin alah 
ist aka dh-pisimuwik ; dkuté kakiké k-dsi-mdtsiyan, dkutéd nk-ohtuhtan, ”’ 
iidw bmisah ; “ kispin kitutatsi, nka-sakotsihik ; maka Gka kitutatsi, dleusi 
nka-sakotsihaw,” itdw Gmisah ; “ kwayask apthta-kisikaki, dkuspi kd-wih- 
takuhtét,” itéw umisa. 

dkusi Gh-wawdyit, dh-mdtsit. ; 

Gékwah aw iskwéw amis itéyihtam: “ mdskéts kinwésk ah-nisiyahh 
nisimis, maskots aw ékwah Gh-akdwdsit," itéyimdw usima ; Gh-mohtsowit 
aw iskwaéw, kdy-ildéyimdt usima.! 

dkust aspin kd-mdtsiyit usima. dkwah éd-kskdyihtahk d-wih-apihta- 
kisikdyik, pihtukdw, éh-paminawasut aw iskwdéw. d-wih-mitsisul, mwdhtsih 
ah-kisi-paminawasut, kitahtawé kdkway pdéhtam ; dapihta-kisikahk itahkdy 
ist kd-pahtahk dh-pd-nikamuyit awiya. piyisk kisiwak. 

“ dkusit mana k-dtihtakusiyit nisim utasdma,” itéyihtam. 

kisiwaék dh-pdythtdyit, kiskuwdyiwa. dkwah musis dkwah pd-pimuh- 
tdyiwa. pdyakwanuhk apiw. dléskwdhtémihk éh-pd-takuhtdyit, utasémiy- 
twa Gkutah asusiméyiwa.: dh-~pé-pihtukdyit, mitunt naspitawdyiwa usima. 

“yahkih ay-apiw awa niwikimakan | éh-pd-ndtitén uma 1” k-dtikut. 

usimah Ghi k-dsindkwaniyikih utayéwinisiyiwa, dkus isindkwaniyiwa 
ulayowinisiyiwa. min Om Ostikwdniyiw dkus isindkwaniyiw. namuya 
kitutéw aw iskwiéw. ; 

asay mina, ‘‘wawdyi! dh-pd-ndtitan 6ma! d-wih-wikimitan 1” 
k-dtwiytt. 

émis tiwiw aw iskwéw: “namuya akusi dh-itdyihtaman, ka-wih- 
kakwé-uhpikihitén, nistmis !? itwiw aw iskwdaw. ' 

“haw, kd-wipahk Gpihta-kisikaki, nika-takusinin, ta-~pd~mawindhwak 
nitsi-mikisistikwan, ”’ k-dtwéyit ; “ tatkdm dnt itah awiyak nama nikitutik, ” 


1 This motif accords with the existence of the tabu. » 


147 


k-dtwdyit, dh-ati-wayawiyit, Gh-ati-utindyit ulasdmiwa, dkus dh-ati-pa- 
pustasdmdyit. mayaw dy-ati-sipwdhtdyit, k-dti-nikamuyit asdma. mia- 
taht mihtdtam aw iskwéw Ghi dh-kitutadt népdwa, dla a&h-kih-wihtamakut 
usima. potih adpihtaw éh-utékustk kd<péhtawét ndtakam uhtst dh-pé-nikam- 
uyit asdma. dkunth dkwah usima, maka mina dh-ipuhtiyit. maka mina 
utasdmiyiwa ch-téhtsiwépindyit, ka-kitoyit aséma. dh~pd-pihtukdéyit, mis- 
taht mihtdtam d-kih-kitutat ohi népdwa. ‘é-kth-nahapiyit usima, asamdw. 
dékwah dh-mitsisuyit, wiya atuskdtam ohi wiydsah kd-pdtdyit usima, dy-ah- 
akutét wayawitimthk.. dyikuhk d-kis-atuskdt, éh-pihtukdt, dkwah nahastéw 
utuydkaniwa, dsay d-kisi-mitsisuyit. . 

“nimisd, lipwi kikitimahin, kd-kitutat ana napéw,” itwéyiwa ; 
“namuy dna G-wih-wikimisk,” ik; “ héw, takuhlélst, wapahki, pé- 
mawindhutst, Gtah nik-uh-kutadwaskamikin ; wiya min dkus ta-télam. 
pihtukdtst, wih-mawindhutat, ‘ kiya nikan [' nik-dtdw ani. tapwihtawitsi, 
dkutah t-6h-kutawaskamikiw ; émiy utah k-apiydn, dkutah tsit-d-sdkiskwdw., 
dékust nika-kiskikwéwépahwdw, ustikwin uhpimd ta-pahkihtin. utina- 
mohkan anim ustikwan, dékus éma miyaw 6ma nika-milsiminin. maka, ékd 
_Gtinamani 6ma mistikwin, kdwi ta-tapisképayiyiw ustikwan. dkusi nika- 
sGkétsthik. hd, ékust, nimisdé 1” 

d, sdkisiw aw iskwdw. 

“ piyisk niya mina dkust nika-totan, ta-kutawaskamikiy 1ydn, nist dkusr 
nika-lolak. dkust simak tit-dtinam nistikwan,. Ldti-wayawihtalat. kispin 
dkus ispayikth, sakotsihitsth, itéh kd~pahkisimuhk, dkuté tit-dhtuhtaw 
nadpéw. kahkiyaw ulaydwinisah ta-mihkwahikdléyiwa. dyakw ana d-wih- 
pi-natisk, d-wih-wikimisk.’ tapwihtawahkan dwaku, éh-miywatisit,” itik 
 usima aw iskwdw ; “ hah, dkusi, nimisé 1” 

- piyis dkust lipisk ayiw. piyis kawisimowak. dh-wapahk, d-kih-wanis- 
kat, dkwah dh-kth-mitsisutsik, mitunith nadnapdlsihow aw uskintkiw, ah- 
wawdsit. pisk kakdts apihia-hisikayik, namuya kikway aluskitam aw 
iskwiw, dh-kaskdythtahk ; Gm asima, “ mdskéls nka-sakotsthik, ” Ketitwiyit, 
dwak6é tahkih Gh-mda-mitundyihtah. piyisk dpihld-kisikayiw, dsay ka- 
pdtwéwitamiytt, dh-pd-nikamuyit asdma. 

“hah,” itdyihtam, “ mitun dtsik 6ma éh-kakipdtisiyan, ‘ nisim dtukd,’ 
kd-kih-ildythtaman |” ttéythtam. 

Gtuh d-pd-takuhldyit uskinikiw, Gtah iskwahlimthk dsusiméiyiwa tas- 
admiyiwa. . 
Gh-pd-pihtukdyit, “yah, nilsi-mikisistikwan, dh-pd-mawinihulan 1” 
k-dtwdyit. ; 

“ Gha 1” itwiyiwa usima. 

Gh-katdpamdl, tapiskots piyak ayistyiniw dkus. inindkuntyiwa. 

s nha, kiya nikdn, nitsi-mikisistikwan 1" itimadwa usima. 

Gh ! namuya ’ kiya ntkdn ! kiya kipd-matawan, ° ’ tlwayiwa usima, 

“dha’ 1” 

kitépamdw. wah dh-apiyit, dkutah wéh-kuldwaskamikiyit, usima 
itahk Gh-bhtiskawapiytt, dkutah wd-sdkiskwiyit, usima umohlumaniyiw 
uhtst kiskikwdwipuhwdyiwa, iléh k-dpit aw iskwiw, dkutah puhkihtin éma 
ustikwan. utami-tapasiw aw iskwdw ; namuya utinam. am astikwan 
kdwt dkutah tapiskupayiyiw. dkhust pimdlisiyiwa. pé-wayawiyiwa ; kaw 
akuld nahapiyiwa. 

“ hdw, kiydskuts maka [” k-dtimtht usima, 


148 
wawdyiyiwa ; tah k-dpiyit usima, dkutah wah-kutawaskamikiyit 


usima. nahi ké-pd-métawéyit itah k-as-ohtiskawapiyit, Gkutah ka-sakiskwit 


usima. Gh-kisktkwéwipahumtht usima, iléh dh-pahkihtiniyik utinam aw 
uskinikiw, éh-ati-vayawit. ; 
“dah nah awiyak kiy-d-sdkétsihit |!” itwéyiwa, dch-ati-sipwahtéytt, 
é-stpwihtalayit Gh6 mistikwan. - ; 
ékwah ma-mawimiw, dh-mdtut, usima ustikwaniyiw d-sipwéhtatawiht. 
ulinam usima wiyawiyiw, dh-astdt uhlapiwiniyih. namuya nipiw, dh-diah- 
sipwdhtalawiht ustikwan.  ydhydyiwa, d-pa-pimisiniyit , uhtapiwiniythk. 
. dkwah tahk dh-mdtut aw iskwiw, piyisk kinwdsk adkutah aydw, tahkih ah- 
“2 yahydytt usima ; maka nama kékway ustikwan. 
dkusi Kilahtawé kd-takuhtéyit nipdw, pahkisimétahk a&y-uhtuhtaytt. 
é-pihtukiyit, tapwaé piku uhtapiwinthk nahapiyiwa, “ éh-pd-ndtitan ; 
é-wih-vikimilan,” dh-itikut. 
simak nisitawdyiméw dwakunt ké-kih-itikut usima. 
“ dha’ ,” tléw ; “ pitah ka-milsisundnaw, ” itéw. 
lapwé paminawasow. ch-kisi-paminawasut, dkwah mitsisOwak. 
Gh-kisi-mitsisutsik, “haw, wawdyiy dkwah,” itik. 

‘dkusi wawdyiw. a 
_. * tsdskwa mtah,” itiw ;  pitah nika-pindn, éka tit-ahkwatsit nisim,” 
tteiw aw iskwéw, ch-wayawit, ndd ch-utinat ‘yoskihtakwah, dyakunih- Gh--. 
penal. : 

“ haw,” ttwéw, ch-pakitinat,  dkadya wihkdts astawih ! —haw, dkusi 1” 

y 3 wayawiw. kahkiyaw pihtsdyihk uma wikiwdw k-dstékih nakatam aw 

‘ iskwéw, d-sipwihtitsik, dh-kiwihtahikut. dkusi naté, kakdts ah-tipiskak, 

takusin wikiwahk awa napdw. potih misdyiw wikih awa napaw, kahkiyaw 
ah-mthkwahikdtayik. . ‘ 
“Gh, dkutah aya dkwah 1” . 
° lapwi miywiythtam aw tskwdw dh-witsiwat napiwa. mistahi kakay- 
> awisiw awa nipdw, pisisik é&h-mdltsit, awa mina iskwdw kahkiyaw kékway 
oy éy-usthtat. piyis kinwdsk dh-uwihtséhtutsik, kitahtawad kiskéyihtam aw 
“  Wskwdw Gh-wih-aydwat awdsisah, piyisk d-misikitit. dkuyikuhk awa naépdéw 
kiskéyihtam. ; 
“ ; “héw, namuya nika-matsin,” itwiw; “usdm mistahi kik-dtuskdn. 
- Gkwah awasis d-vwih-aydwat, namuya nintawdyihtén t-dtuskdyin. méaskéots 
wih-uhpikitsih aw awisis ké-wih-ayawayahk, ” itéw.t 
“Gha’ ,” ttdw aw iskwéiw. ~~ 
lapwi namuya mistahi Gh~atuskiw, éké ta-misi-wandtsthat oh dwdsisah. 
piyisk kitahtawé dkwah Ghkusiw aw iskwéw, d-wih-wapamat . awasisah. 
lapwd piytsk tawdsimisiw, potih naépdsisah, 
Kitahtawd, “ tapiskdts kutak,” itéythtam. 
| “‘miydmay mina péyak,” itéw unapaéma. 


nr an 


$ 


oP 


6ki napdsisak. mituni mamaskdtamwak utawdsimisiwdwa dh-mohkuman- 


4 Rationalized or rudimentary couyade? 


149 - 


ttoskwandytt. kiyipa misikitiwak. dkwah atuskéwak, awa népdéw éh-mah- 
métsit. awa mina iskwaw atuskéw dkwah. dkwah 6k dwasisak pisistk ma- 
métawdwak, atsusisah dh-aydisik, Gw-uhisi-mdtawdtsik. kitahtawdé mana 
namuya wipamdw awa iskwéw utsawdsintigah ka-kapd-kistk.-:. _ Gyikuhk wd~ 
lakusiniytkth, dkuyikuhk takuhtéyiwah utsawdsimisah. : 

kitahtawd, “ ka-wanisininéwaw !” itéw utsawdsimisah.. 

piyisk misikitiwak okt napdsisak. *kitahtawdé ‘mdka mina é&hakatah- 
téyit, ch-akawdwiyit, wih-kakwa-wapamdw aw iskwaw ukusisah, 

6mist k-dtwayit: “ hah, _nasimis ! mati mind nitawapamdtan kisisin- 
awl” k-dtwéyit. 

dkuytkuhk kdé-kiskisit ustma, aspin ka-kih-kiskilwdwdpahumibt, ah- 
pimutahkwdayit, aspin wipisisiyihk kth-ati-nipawiyiwa. dkus ist kiwdw. 
namuy dkwah wih-atuskéw, dh-ay-apit, dh-md-mitundyihtah aspin Gh- 
kittmahimtht ugima. ayikuhk G-wth-tipiskayik, kd-takuhtadyit uskusisah. 

“kékway ¥ma mana ch-natamak, ka-kapd-kisik aka ka-takusiniyak ? ” 

maka kiskdéyimik éh-kitapamat ukusisah, aspin kd-sipwahtdyit, k-dti- 
nipawiytt wapisisiythk. . 

omis\ tik : “naka, otéh uma mana Gh-ituhtéyahk, péyak mikiwahp 


ah-ayak, ayisiyiniw dh-pdéyakut, ékad dy-ustikwanit, dkw ana mana ah- 


ntawapamayahk, dkaw oma k-dpiyahk,” ith. 
*, maétéw aw iskwaw. 
 tytkuhk éh-poni-matut, omis itéw: “ nésawisimisitik, kisisiwaéw ana ; 
nisimis ana; mistah ana d-kth-miyusit, é-kih-mikisiwiyik ustikwén, maka 


6-kth-mawindhukut witsi-mikisistikwana, aspin d-ki-sipwéhtatayit uslikwan. . 


kéyadpi tsth? ydhydw ?” 
“Gha’ ; kéyapits yéhydw, ” dttk ukusisah. 


. mis itwiw aw Gsimimas : “ nistasd, dyakw dtsik animah otéh oténaw 
k-dydk, anah pihtéyask ké-wikit, dyakw Gtsik anima ispimthk k-akuték, 
ttah kahkékiw k-dkusit,” ttwaw aw Ssimimds ; “ ha, ké-wapahk mina ka- 
nitawdpamanaw kisisinaw, ” itwdw aw dsimimads. 

aha’ - 
lapwd éh-utakusik, takusin awa napdw, G-kih-matsit. uwikimdkanah 
ka-kamwatapiyiwa. 
. ‘i tanachki, niwikimdkan ?” itéw. 


“nd, Ok oki latsawdsimisinawak ké-kapd-kistk aka k-apitsik, k-dtitan 
mana, Gs oki usisiwawa cGh-mén-ituhtdtsik, dyakunt dh-dlsimustawitstk, 
k-oh-kamwatapiyadn, " ttwéyiwa. 

ékusi tapwd céh-tipiskdyik, dh-nipdtsik, dh-wdpahk, kiksépad dsay mina 
sipwéhtiyiwa utsawdsimisiwdwa. dkwah namuya wih-kitahamawdw aw 
iskwéw utawdsimisah. . ‘ 

Gh-ntawdpamdtsik 6ki awésisak usisiwawa, dkutd dh-takuhidtsik, 


G-kth-ponahkik, Gmis itwiw aw ustésimds: “ ha, nsimis, mahti niya nikan 
mika-kakwé-natén kisisinaw ustikwan,?’ itéw. 
“aha’. 


“ha, nsimis, Haspin patayani, kakwé-waniskapitéhkan kisisinaw, 
“aha.” , 
ékus ‘i ati-woyauit. aw ustsésimds, dkutah skwahtémihk dh-aydt, “ héw, 
uskats d-kth-itéythtaman tit-Omitsaskusisiwiyan i” 


1¥or kdyapile tsth; so usually in close-knit phrases of rapid speech when final and 
initial ts come together. 


a 


150 

lapwd unpihydw, dh-pimihat adkuld ka-kih-wapahtahk usisah ustik- 
waniyiw, dkutd Gh-takuhtat, tsiki mwéhist éh-chidat, ha-hituytt Ohi kahka- 
kiwa. \ 
dkus dwa kd-mikisistikwanét wayawiw, ch-tépwat, “ kiwih-maskamik- 
awindnaw nikéhkwaskwahikan !” éh-ttwdt. 

dkust tapastw awa umitaskusis, dkwah d-nawaswatiht, éh-kiwd-mak- 
uhtht, ayis atimthtsth ta-nipahiht. a&kust piyisk takusin usimisah atah 
k-dyayit. dkust ponthaw. 


dkwah aw Gstmimds 6mis itdw : “‘.tansi tiydtariian ?” itéw “ustésah. 
‘hd, mayaw tstkih ch-aydyan, ay kitgw ana. kahkakiw ; nimdsthik- 
awin.” ye ta 4 


“kah { &, mahtt ntya 1” itwéw aw "giimimas. 

ékwah aw ésimimds wayawiw. 

“ haw, uskats d-ki-hidyihtaman ta-kéhkdhkuwiydn |” itwéw., 

tapwd kahkéhkéwiw; uhpthydw, dy-ispihdt.. dkuté dh-takusthk, 
tapimihk uhtsi méskistawiw chi kahkakiwah. kahkakiw awa ispih ch- 
wapamdl, namuya wih-kitow, dh-kustat kéhkdhkuah. 6ma ustikwaén mani- 
pitam awa kihkéhk, dkus ch-tapasit. dyikuhk wahyay ch-ihtat, dkuyikuhk 
kituyiwa. itydtah-wayawipahtat awa, dsay wahyaw kih-atimihdyiwa. 

“ahahé 1” itwéw; “ nawaswék, nawaswék ! kimaskamikawindnaw 
nostikwanim I" itwdw. 

nandtuhk iéwiwiwak, dh-nawaswdtsik. mihkawikiw kaéhkaéhk ; naka- 
tiw kahkiyaw ohi ka-pimthayit. 

tsik dh-thtat, Omis ttwdw: “ nistdséh, yshtéwdépinah ! kakwé-wanis- 
kapis kisisinaw !” itu. 

tapud d~yohtéwadpinahk, dkwah 6hi d-wih-kakwé-waniskandt, dhuyikuhk 
kisiwa nay aka ayaw., . 

“dwakwd, nistésd ! sinikuhkitundpis !”’ itéw. 4 

lapwa taépiskupayiw um ustikwan, dkwah aw éstésimds d-sinikuhkitun- 
dndt. dkust pimdtisiw. ké-nawaswatsik oki kahkiyaw Kiwéwaks miywdyth- 
tamwak oki napésisak ah-pimdtisiyit usisiwdwa. - : 


“ haw, kiwdlan dkwah ! kiwéhtahatén kisisinaw 17’ ~ 


Gd, wayawiwak. uwipisisah dkwah-utastutinah, dyakunth piku ulinam 
awa, ka-mitkisewiyrh ustikwan, dkus Gh-wayawitstk, | 
‘a, nisimis, niya nka-pimiwihaw kisisinaw. ’ 
“ tha’ 
hd, ah-pimutahkwat, “ haw, nisis, dtah nk-ali-nipawinin. ka-wikiyahk 
dstam-itah ka-sakak, dkutah nika~pahkisininan. ” 


tapwi pimih-nisuképawiwak wipisisihk. dh-uidkusik, dkutah pah- 
kisinuk, dkutah uhtsi d-pimuhidisik. aw iskwaw wayawitimihk Gh-atushdt, 
Vitahtawd ka-pd-sakéwdyit usima dkwah utawasimisah, dyitaw ah-pa-pmuh- 
ldtstk 6k dwasisak usisrwdwa, - 

simak aw iskwdw, “haéy hay ! nisimis pimdtisiw !” itéw, d-takuh- 
' tdyit, ch-atamiskawét,. " akwah ah-pihtukédtsik, Gh-ati-kisitd put aw iskwiw. 
kitahtawd ka~pihtukéiyit uwikimdkana. 

“hay hay hay 1" dtéw; “ tapwd Gyimats niwdpamaw nistéw |” itwéw 
awa napaw. we ‘ : 

dkust dkutah ayawak. pisistk déh-métawdkdtstk usisiwdwa, namuya 
dkwah wihkdts kunt, tid ttuhtdwak oki awdsisak, usistwawa G-witsi-mdta- 
wimadisik Pahisa: ythk, 


, 
e 


a 151 


“aka totéhk kisisiwaw ! mistahi kimétawakandwaw !” éh-itat aw 
iskwéw utsawdsimisah, “ha, namuya !” ttwéw aw oskinitkiw ; “ kiyam 
nka-mdtawakdatikwak nilghkwatimak } adwakunik. k-oh-pimatistyan,”’ ttéw 
umisah. ; 

dkust ptyisk kinwdsk aydwak.- “awa naépéw pisisik matsiw. Mitahtawd 
namuya takusin. dh-wépahk, aka dh-takusthk, “ mahtth, nitahkwatemitik, 
nka-nitunawéw kohtawiyiwaw, '” itéw. 

sé aha’ . a? uw 

tapwd nitunawdw,.-itah dh-matahat mitihtdw ; pot dsah kah-matahayit 
moswa ; dyakunth ‘mitihtdyiwa wistawa, potth wapahtam dy-usdtinaytk, 
_ d-pasahisdyik dkutah, ‘mohkitsiwanipék dh-ayayik. dkutah dsa ké-ki- 

tuhtdyit wistawa. dh-utthtahk, itah uhtsih kd-wayawttsiwaniyik, ka-pé- 
sdkiskwdyit misi-kindpikwah, dh-ldwatiyit, dh-utatamikut, d-misiwdépaythi- 
kut. awdn ohi, dkutih kih-apiyiwa wistawa, namuya dh-nipiyit. wistah 
namuya nipiw. witapimdw wistawah, piyis dtukd ch-tipiskayth. 

Gh-wapaniyik, dka é&h-takusthk, oki nisétdwak, aw Ostdsimds, “ mahtih 
nka-ntunawdw ksisinaw |” 

“ awahd, nistisé !” itwdw aw 6stmimas. 

dkusi sipwéhtaw aw ustsésimds. potih itah dsah k-Gti-mitithtayit mos- 
wah, dkutah at-ay-ituhtdw. piyisk utihtam ima méhkitstwanipak. tsik 


dkusi mina tipiskayiw. Gh-wapahk, aw dkw dstmimds ka-sipwahtat, 
dh-ntunawat ustésah. potih dsa ké-mitihtat méswah. wistah mitihidw. 
mohkitsiwanipak dah-utihtahk, tsiki céh-aydt, 6m tah k-oh-pd-sdkiskwdyit 
misi-kindpikwah, maka mina pd-sakiskwéyiwa. © 

“ dwakunt kd-misi-wandtshikutstk, ’ idythtam. 

Gh-tdwatiyit, d-wih-ulalamikut, pdyakwanuhk nipawiw. tydta-tawatiy- 
itsi, namuya kih-ispayiw. ; . 

“ sohkth, misi-kinapik ! tadwatth ! pdé-wayawih !” itdw. , 

iydtah-itwayttsth, d-wth-ulatamikut, namawya kaskthik. tahkih aytw- 


misi-kindpikwah. awdin ohi, ustésah usisah dhidwiya dkutah uhtst pa- 
wayawiyiwa. nipahdw ayisk ohi; dkust kiwéhtahdw. kiwéwak ; Gh- 
ltipiskdyik takusinwak wikiwahk. 

dkwah Géh-wapahk, 6mis ttwéw usimimads awa: “haw, usém kimoht- 
sowin, nistéséd. namuya ds dni kimanitéwin ; pisisik kisdkdtsihikawin. 
nisawats dh-ildyihiamadn niya kik-dtitindwaw.”’ « 

“ce aha’ . ” ; . 

“haw, nohtah, kiyawdw nikdwiy: tséskwah ayisiyiniwak tit-dhtdwak ; 
nikan 6téh watsthk kikaw-ayéndwaw ; ‘ka-misikitindwdw ; ukiniyak k-dsiyth- 
kdsundwaw,” itéw ohtawiyah Gkwah ukawiyah, “ usdm ch-miyu-pimatist- 
yak. — dkwah kiya, nisisd, 6téh dh-pahkisimuhk, dkutd kik-otaskin. ‘ ch- 
mikisistikwandét ayistyiniw nikitimadkdyimik,’ tit-étwdw ayistyiniw ; Gh- 
nipat, kika-wapamik, nisisé: — dkwah niyandn : dtah ntkdnds ist tit-apisis- 
istwak atsdhkusak ; tsdh-tsikih tit-aydwak ; nik-dkutéwiwindn niyadn nis- 
tis,” itiw ; “hah, dkusi, niyak !” .. 


e 


152 - 


dkusi oki sipwihtawak. watsiy dh-ulihtahkik awa dwikimdkana, kawip- 
ayihéwak ; ukintwiwak. dkwah oki népdsisak ispimihk ituhtéwak, ah- 
atsahkusiwitsik. - 
dkust dkuyikuhk. dh-iskwak adtaydhkdwin. 
4 


\ 


There was a certain large town, of old, when; as we are told, they 
ate each other. And there a woman was chief, a Thunderbird-Woman, 
who ruled over one-half of the town; and over the other half there ruled as 
chief a Wolf; a man was this one. They used their followers as prizes 
of the contest, of their manitou contests, so that, whenever one was de- 
feated, then his followers were killed and eaten; that is what is called 
“eating each other.” Various kinds, those who were called men, various 
kinds of beasts they were. That is the way this was. ~ 

Then in the part where the Wolf was chief, a young woman from there, 
who had a small brother whom she cared for and loved, when her father 


‘and mother and all her other brothers and sisters had been killed, and only 
- the two, she and her little brother were left alive, then thus she thought: 


“I shall go away; perhaps it will be possible for my little brother here to 
live,” she thought: “He is too pitiful, the little fellow,” she thought; ‘So 
then, tonight let there be very bad weather! Let it snow!” she said; “TI 
shall go away and no one shall know whither I go.” So she thought. 

Really, when night fell, there was very bad weather, and it snowed. 
Then the young woman was glad. As soon as it was very dark, she made 
ready; she cut down her lodge and threw it-aloft into the storm. And her 
sleeping-mats and her blanket-robes and all the things she would have 
occasion to use, she took, when she had made ready, and she wrapped all 
her possessions in a buffalo robe. In this way she set out, dragging her 
belongings, dragging them as if on a flat sled, and carrying her little brother. 
There was a bad storm The storm kept on all night, while she walked on. 
At last day dawned; the bad weather did not abate. All that day it 
stormed. Only towards evening the day grew clear. She kept on walking. 
At last night fell. At that point she camped. She had nothing to eat, 
there where she slept. -When day broke, she went on. Then, when day 
broke, her little brother cried, because he was hungry. Yet she needs made 
ready to go on. When she had found a stretch of country that was dotted 
with clumps of trees, where there was one larger grove, thither she went, 
to look it carefully over, thinking, “I shall try to find a good place to live.” 
Really, she did find in the wood a hollow place where there ws water and 
denise forest round about. There she pitched camp. She cleared off the 
snow where she:meanitto dwell; she built a fire. Her little brother still was 
weeping with hunger.. When she had built ‘the fire, she made something 
tO use as-a snare. ‘ ‘ 

_ And so, when her little brother had gone to sleep, she set a snare, 

thinking, ‘‘Perhaps I may kill a-rabbit; my little brother could eat it.” 

Then, as she gathered faggots, from the place where she gathered 


faggots, some rabbits scampered forth. One of them got caught in the 


snare. She killed it. 


‘Splendid! Now my little brother shall eat!’ she thought. ee 


_ She took it back with her; eagerly she prepared it. to-cook, 1 that she 
might give her brother to eat. When she had cooked it done, her little 


{ 


153 ° 


brother awoke. So she gave him food. Then she got up and fetched sticks 
to build their lodge. In the end she had got many sticks. By this time 
her little brother was again on the verge of crying, so she sat down by him 
and consoled him. There she remained. As soon as he had ceased to 
weep, she built their lodge, cutting grasses, with which she ‘thatched the 
lodge and made matting for underfoot. By this time darkness was at hand, 
but she had built her lodge so that it would be warm; and now she took 
her little brother inside, and built a fire within. Just at sunset she heard 


a rabbit squeal.’ She went there: there was one. She killed it. She was 


glad. ; 
*“So my little brother will not go hungry,” she thought. 
She sat there. ' J 
Then, in the night she meditated, thinking, “Would that no one might 
ever find me! Are all persons, I wonder, even so?” she thought; the way 
those people were in the place whence she had come, they who always 


killed and ate each other, because she thought, ‘Are others, I wonder, - 


that way too?”’ was why she spoke thus. 

Truly, she was glad to be alone, for she thought, “In this way, perhaps 
I shall bring up my little brother,” ” 

There every day she gathered firewood and snared many rabbits; 
and truly, after each night, when she had slept and-in the morning fetched 
the rabbits, she was very glad that she continued to kill many of them. 
, At last she built out of doors something on which to hang the rabbits, hav- 
ing killed sé*many. 

- “Well, and*so now my little brother and I shall not too soon be hun- 
gry!” she thought. 

She worked at nothing but snaring rabbits and bringing wood, and 
concerning that place where she was, she thought, “Would that no one 
might ever find re!” | : 

Then in time, when she had been there a long while, her brother grew 
larger. Then she made arrows for her brother, meaning to teach him. to 
be a good marksman. Really, in the end he was a good shot; in time the 
ad became skilled to the point where he wanted to try to kill something. 
Presently, as he walked about in the wood, he saw a rabbit. When he 
tried to kill it, really, he killed it. He was glad, and brought it into the 

oage. “ — os 
“Splendid!” said the young woman; ‘And so now there will be no 
danger of our starving, now that my little brother is killing rabbits,” she 
thought. ; 

And so she made some more arrows, larger ones, thinking, ‘So that 
he can do well at killing things with them.” At last, when she had finished 
them, and the lad was using them, really he killed many and many rabbits, 
Then the woman tore pieces from the tent-covering and made something 
for her brother to wear as breeches and as a shirt. By this time the lad 
was almost a-young man. He was very handsome. Then, as. they dwelt 
there, presently, as he was walking about, trying to get sight of rabbits, 
he came upon the track of a dwarf moose. 

“What kind of creature is this?” he thought; “Suppose I try to get 
a look at him,” he thought. 


Presently he saw it. 


ary 


Af g. . 


cs 


. “ 154 , 
» “What kind of ereature is this?’ he thought; “Let, me see if 1 can 
kill him,” he thought. 
So he shot an arrow at it; really, he killed it. When he went up to 
it, he did not know what manner of beast it was. 
“Let me take him home; let.me see if my big sister knows him,” he 


‘thought. 


He took it home, dragging it, and brought it to their dwelling. 

“Big sister, come, see; what sort of creature is this?’ he said to her. 

" When the young woman came out, at once she recognized it. 

“Splendid! ‘Now we-shall have good eating, little brother! This is 
a dwarf moose,” she told him. 7 ‘ 


Yy 


“Hol” ae . 

He was glad. , “ a4 

- “And from this creature my brother can have moccasins,” said the” 
young woman, as she set about skinning it. 4" - 


« §$So then they ate it: And now the woman no Jonger set snares; for 
row her brother continued to kill rabbits. So now the woman prepared 
that creature, that her brother might have moccasins of it. When they 
had slept, in the morning when the young woman got up, her’ brother was 
by no means still asleep, but had gone hunting. In the afternoon her 
brother arrived; he hrought two dwarf moose. 

“Splendid! "7 said/the young woman; ‘And sg now we shall never need 
to go hungry!” she thought; ‘Now of these ereatures my brother shall _ 
have breeches,” she thought. . 

So, when she had finished- skinning them and cutting them_up, with) 


zeal then she gave her brother his food. Never now did her brotiier addres ‘ 


her, for he was too-bashful to speak to her, now that he was a young, man. 
Then, the next morning early, when she arose, she saw that again her 
brother had already gone away to hunt; she, for her part, set zealously to 
work preparing the hides of the dwarf moose, to make breeches. Toward 
evening, when she had finished tanning the dwarf-moose skins, her brother 


_ arrived. Again he was bringing two dwarf mitoose. The young woman 


yl 


rejoiced. Soon night came. By this.time she had finished working the 
hides of the dwarf moose, and was drying them. So then,.of nights she 
Would sew, making clothes for her brother. 


* At last he killed also.a buffalo, and brought it home, thinking, “What 


' kind of beast is this?” 


When the young woman gaw it, “Splendid! Splendid!” she exclaimed; 


- “Now my brother ean have this one for his sleeping mat.” 


So she thought; but now they never spoke to each other, only “that 
the woman would look for, a moment at her brother and think, “Truly, 
my brother is very handsome,” and, “Truly, it is well that I brought my, 
brother off here.” - 

The youth hunted every. day, and dragged home buffalo always 
entire; 4s soon as he would bring a buffalo, by the next, morning. the 
woman had already prepared the buffalo hide, for sleeping robes and robes 
to wear, for her brother and for herself. And then one morning, when she 
got up, her brother was still asleep. When he knew that she had finished 
cooking, he got up. So then they ate. When they had. eaten, the youth 


went out of doors, to cut sticks for snowshoes which he intended to make, 


and to set t traps, two traps which he had built. When-he came baek when 


Q 


~ 
wk 


Meat _ 
~e 2 
° - | . 
, \ 
r 
4 


_ the woman seb that, he.was brthging. sticks of wood, after giving him his 
meal, the woman took the:aticks, and melted some fat. Whegfthe youth 
_ had eaten, and was whittling ‘the sticks to make snowshyes, then the 
- woman knew that he was, fnaking snowshoes. “Then she prepared that 
rawhide for cutting round the edge. Then, the next mérning, when he 
went to look at his traps, He-bad trapped an eagle and An otter. 
al . a . . ‘ ’ ’ 
He took all the feathers. And the woman skinned the otter, and 
‘dried the skin.” . 
“No doubt my brother wants a head-dress,” ghe thought. 
Then he made also his snowshoes. When he had done making them, 
the woman took the snowshoes and threaded Ahem with the thongs,-and 
dried them. And so, when they had-dried, wren in the morning she got up, 
again her bréther no longer slept, but had g¢ne hunting; so she went about 
her work outside the lodge, tanning hides, thinking, ‘I shall improve our 


? 


dwelling.” Towards evening, as shes ood outside the door, shé heard © 
something. As she listened, it appéayed that someone was singing as he - 


came; so it seemed to-her. -, 

“T wonder if it is my~brother Y she thought. . 

When she went inside, quiclfy from close by came the sound of that 
person. When he had come near, he broke off his song. It was her brother, 
coming home with song. Whefe the faggots lay, on top there he threw his 
snowshoes, and as he did sg they gave a call.. 

“And so it is they whe’came a-singing!” thought the woman. 

When she went out/he was bringing nothing but fresh hides. When 
she took it, and looked/at it, she saw that it was the skin-of a young bull, 
with the horns and the hoofs. These she ent off, and Jaid them aside. 
The hide she laid algo on top of the firewood. 

“Doubtless hé wants a blanket-robe,” she thought. 

The horns ghd“the hoofs she brought indoors and put them down. 
Then; when thé young man had eaten; he took the horns and placed them 
close to the fife, to take out the bone. At last he took aJl the bone. Then 
he went toed. The next morning, he sat in one place; he did not hunt, 
but prepafed the horns. : 

-, And the woman, preparing the buffalo robe, just.as she thought of her 
Seth , “He must be hungry!” even then her brothef rose from his settee. 
‘hen, “I wonder what is the matter!” she thought. 

But it was because that youth meant to steal his sister’s wampum- 


“Ss 


. 


ads. « : 
. So, “What can-it be?” thought the woman. -. ’ 
At last the youth finished preparing the horns and the hoofs. By 
nightfall the woman finished the buffalo robe. When the next day dawned, 
the youth attached to it the horns and the hoofs, to make him bianket- 
robe. “ 

"He said to his sister, ‘Sister, have you wampum beads that are*white, 
and some that are blue?” he asked her. . 

“Ves,” . 


Accordingly, she took them and handed them to him.. Then the youth | 


combed hig hair, and when he had combed it, breathed upon those, beads, 
whereupon a great many of those white wampum-beads. were on his head 
there;. he had threaded all the hairs on one side of his head with the beads, 


‘just as though his hair were’ white, and on the other side the blue heads 


“. 156 


were strung on his head: he was a Wampum-Head... “Then truly handsome 
was that young man; his coat was ornamented with quill-work and with 
tassels of weasel-sking, and some were on his breeches, and they, too, had: - 


quill-work, and they had weasél-sking on them, and. he had a headgear of Be, 


that otterskin, and on his robe: awere horns, and hoofs were on it. . Then 
truly handsome was that youth, when in this guise he had decked himéelf. 
Then,.as he hunted, each day, and ‘each day killed a buffalo, i in time they 
had‘a plenty of food. 


.* Then atyone time, when théy had long dwelt "there, then presently + 
| the’ youth did 


not éaresto hunt, but sat still in one place. Although she 
gave her brother food; the youth would not eat, but sat listleasly there. 

The woman thought, “Surely my-brother is in: pain,’ 

At last two days passed , and the youth had not gone anywhere, but 
sat all the time inactive. * 

Then the woman asked him, “Brother, are you in pain? You make 


. ‘me gad, not eating,” she told him. 


ae 


“No, ” said the youth. vA . 
T hus he did not "tell her, what it was. 


The next morning, when they got up and had eatén, “Now then, my 


sister, even as I look, eyen as I am dressed, go a young man will look; 


even his’ snowshoes will look so. From the direction of noon that youth 
will come. Here hy the dogr he will place his snowshoes. ‘Come, my, 
wife, I have. come ti fetch voy he will say to you. Wheri thus he speaks 


to you, do not address him. One who comes to challenge me is that youth,” - 


* he told his sister; ‘I shall hunt over here, in the direction where the’sun 


never goes; from this direction, where always I do.my hunting, fror this 
direction I shall come,’’ he told his sister; “If you speak to him/he will 
defeat me; ’ “but if you do not speak to him, thén I shall defest/him, ” he 
told his sister; “Exactly at noon, that is when, he will omy told his 
sister. 

With that’ he went out of the lodge, on- Anis hunt. , 

Then the woman thought thus: “Perhaps because my’brother and I BO 
long have been alone together, perhaps-now he has fallexf in love with me,” 
she thought concerning. her brother; because she va silly, she thought 


. thus of her brother. 


So her brother was off hunting. When she Knew that noon was at 
hand, she went indoors, and prepared her meal. //As she was about to eat, 
just as she had done cooking, she heard something; in the direction of 
noon she heard someone who came a-singing,’ At last he came near. - 

“Iéven so my brother’s snowshoes always sound,” she thought. 

When he‘had come near, he ceased from hig song. And now he was in 
sight, walking hither. She sat still. When he came to the doorway, there 


-he leaned up his snowshoes, When ‘hé came inside, greatly he resembled 


her brother. 
“From of old my wife.sits heré! It is to fetch you I have come!’ he 
said to her. 
As looked those clothes aye rio ’s, 80 looked this person’s clothes. 
His head, too, looked exactly’so. The woman did not speak to him. 
‘Again, “Get ready! Itis to fetch you I have come! It is to marry 
you!” he said. / 
Thus spoke the woman: “It was not with the like of this i in mind that 
I did my best to brin you up, my, brother!’’ she said. 


/ 


/ 
/ 


L 


; < 17] nd 
At ‘that theman rose to his feet. .. 
‘Very_well, 


a, 


Wamhpum- ead,” he said, <“Secing .that everywhere else no one ever 
~ peaks toy e,” he said, and*went out of the lodge, taking his snowshoes 


as he weft, and putting them on. As soon as he started away, the snow- 
shoes Wegan to sing.’ Very sorry was'the woman that she had spoken to 
this zhaniin spite of her brother’s instruction. Then, in the middle of thé 
aftérnoon she’ heard snowshoes come singing from the north. It was Ker 

other, bringing, as always, a treat of game. When he. threw hig snow- 
shges, as always, on the wood, the snowshoes gave a call. As he came 


“ into the lodge, deeply she regretted that she had spoken to that man. 


When her brother had sat down, she gave him his.meal. While he ate, 
she worked at the meats which he had brought, hanging them out of doors. 
When she had finished her work, she went. indeors and put away her 
brother’s dishes, for he had done eating. Le 


“Sister, truly, you have’ brought me to ar evil pass by speaking to. 


that man,” he said} “His purpose is not to marry you,” he told her; “Now 
then, when tomorrow he comes to challenge me, at-this spot | shall sink 
into the ground; he, in turn, will do the same. When he comes inta the 
lodge to challenge me, ‘You first!’ I shall say to him. If he -coriiplies, 


there he will sink into the ground; and right here where I sit he will stick. 
out his head froin the ground. At that I shall slash off his head. His head * 


. will fall to one side. Do you then take his head. I shall hold fast to the 
body. But, if you do not take the head, his head will fly back into place. 
In this way he will overcome'me. There, that is the way of it, sister!”’ 

Oh, the woman was frightened. - 


“Then I, too, shall do the same, I shall sink into the ground. He will 


- do the same thing to me. Then at once he will take my head with him 


out of the lodge. If this happens, if he defeats me, then from the direction 
of the setting sun will come a man. All his garments will be made of red. 
‘He will come to,fetch you; he will marry you. ‘Give credence to him, for 
he is good,”’ her brother told her; “There, that is the way of it, my sister!” 


At last night came. -At last they.went to bed. In the morning, when 


he got up and when they had eaten, the youth made a careful toilet and put . 


on hig finery. It was almost moon, but the woman did not work at any- 


thing, for she was unhappy; she brooded.without cease on her brother’s ' 


words, “Perhaps he will defeat me.” At lastest was noon, and already that 
person came nojsing it, snowshoes a-singing. *~ 


tomorrow at noon I shall come to challenge my fellow 


) 


9 


“Alas,” she thought, “It is plain that I was most stupid to think, | 


‘Perhaps it is my brother!’ ” she thought. RL 


Wher’ the youth arrived there, he leaned up his snowshoes in the -: : 


doorway. 


“When he came into the lodge, “Ha, my fellow Wampum-Head,'I have 
‘come to challenge you!” he said. ; 

“Yes!” spoke her brother. , 

‘When she looked at-them, they looked like one and the same person. 

“Ha, you first, my fellow Wampum-Head!” her brother was told. 

“Ha! No! You first! It is you have come to play,” said her brether. 

“Very well!” Co oo 

83186—~I1 , 


Voto | 
Aa 
t 
Ae 


dy 


158 . 

She watched him. There where he sat, there he sank into the earth, 
and there, in front of her brother as he’ sat, ‘there he came sticking out his 
“head; and her brother with his knife slashed through the other’s neck. 
’ Toward where /the woman. sat fell that head of his. She was taken up 
. with fright; she did not seize it. That head of his went back into place. 
. Thereupon he was alive. He emerged from the’ earth ; he sat down again 
in his place. 

“There, but now it is your turn!” her brother was told. 

“He made ready, from where her brother sat, he sank into the earth. 
In front of where he sat who had come to play, there her brother stuck out 
his tiead from under the earth. When her brother’s head had been slashed 
» off, that youth took it from where it fell, and started out of the lodge. 

“There is the one who, of all anywhere, could defeat me!’ he said, as 
he started to go away, taking with him that bead. 


Then she lamented, weeping, because her brother’s head was taken 
away. She took up her brother's body, and placed it upon his settee. He 
did not die, even though his head had been taken away. He breathed, as 
he lay there, on his couch. - Then, weeping without respite, at last a long 
time that woman stayed there, her brother all the while breathing; but he 
had no head. ~ ; 

Then, at one time, ‘there arrived a man who came from the region of . 
the setting sun. 

When he came into the lodge, really, he sat down directly upon her 
couch, saying to her, ‘I have come to fetch you; I mean to marry you.” 

h At once she recognized him as the one of whom her brother had told 
er, 

“Yes,” she said to him; ‘But first let us eat,” she said to him. - 

i Accordingly she cooked a meal. When she had prepared her meal, 
they ate. 

When they had eaten, “Come, make ready now,” he told her. 

So she made herself ready. 

“Wait a bit,” she said to him; “TFirst I must put fuel on the fire, 
that my brother may not freeze,” said the woman, and went out of the 
lodge; she took four sticks of crumbling wood and put them on the fire. 

“There,” she said, as she set them down, “Never go out!—Well, I am 
ready!” 

' She went out. The woman left behind in their lodge all the things 
that were there, and they departed, that man taking her with him to his 
home. Accordingly, over yonder, at nightfall, that man arrived at their 
~ dwelling. She saw that his lodge was a large one and that it had been made 
entirely red. 

“Now dwell here!” , 

Truly, the woman was-glad-to-be with the. man. The man was very~~— 
industrious, hunting all the time, and the woman, too, made all manner of 
things. At last, when they had been married for 8 ® long ime, she knew 


that she was going to have achild; ........... Then the man 
knew it. 

‘Very oI shall not hunt,” he 6a, “You would be working too 
much, N at you are going to "have a child, T do not want you to work. 


Perhaps t. iid we are to have will grow up,” he told her. 
“Yes,” woman answered him. 


159 > 


Accordingly, from that time ‘on she did-not work much, so as not to 
injure that child. Then in time the woman fell ill, as she was about to see 
her child. Then, finally, she bore her child, and it turned out to be a boy. 

Presently, “It seems as if there were another,” she thought. 

“Surely there is one more,” she told her husband. 

Really, they saw this one, too. This one, too, was a boy. They had 
twins.. The man was glad, and the woman too. Then the man never 
hunted, each of them taking care of one of their children. At last, when 
they had been there a long time, those children grew bigger. Then, when 
those children had begun to walk, knives grew forth from the elbows of 


those boys. They wondered greatly at their children’s having knife- _ 


elbows. Quickly they grew up. Then they worked, as the man hunted. 
The woman,-too, now worked. And those children always played, having 
arrows with which to play. Then, in time, the woman would not see her 
children all day. Only just before evening her children would come home. 

Presently, “You will get lost!’ she told her children. 

‘At last those boys grew to full size. Then at one time, when in their 
usual way they had walked off and out of sight, the woman decided to try 
to observe her sons. - ; 

___..One_of them said, ‘Come, younger brother! Let us go again to see 
our uncle!” 

At that she remembered her brother, who had had his head cut off, 
the last she had seen of him. Her sons shot arrows, and-off they sailed, 
standing on their arrows. Thereupon she went home. She did not care 
now to work, but sat there, thinking of how her brother had been undone 
when last she had seen him. Not until nightfall did her sons come home. 

‘What is it you always go after, when all day you do not come home?” 

But her!sons knew that she had observed them as they went off stand- 
ing on their arrows. : 

Thus they answered her: ‘Mother, because we always go off there, to 
where there is a solitary lodge, where one man stays alone, who has no 
head—because we visit him, that is why, as you say, we do not stay at 

“home,” they told her. 

She wept. ‘ 

When she stopped weeping, she said to them, “My children, he is 
your mother’s brother; he is my younger brother; he was very handsome, 

. and beaded was his head, but his fellow Wampum-Head challenged him to 
a contest and carried off his head. Is he still breathing?” 
“Yes; he still breathes,” her sons told her. ys 
The younger brother spoke as follows: “Elder brother, plainly it 
. appears that it is none other than that which, in the town over there, hangs 
au: over the dwelling of him who lives in the centre, there where the 
raven sits aloft,” said the younger brother; ‘Come, tomorrow let us again 
visit our uncle,” said the younger lad. 
o . “Very well.” 
At nightfall that man arrived from his hunt. His wife was sitting 
' and brooding. 

“What is the matter, my wife?” he asked her. 

“Dear me, when these children of ours, as I always am telling you, 
stay out all day, it seems that they always go to where their uncle is, and 
now they have told me it, and that is why I sit and grieve,” she said. 

g318¢—114 : 


160 


Then, when night came, and they had slept, then in the morning early, 
again their children went off. And now the woman did not care to stop 
her children. 

When those children went to see their uncle, and had come there and 
built up the fire, the elder boy said, ‘Now, younger brother, let me first 
try to go get our uncle’s head.” 


“Very well.” 

“Well then, brother, if I come bringing it, try to pull our uncle to his 
feet,” he told him. - & 

“Yes.” ‘ 


Then, as the elder brother was going out of the lodge, as he stood 
in the doorway, ‘Now, at the very first I did think that I should be a 
swallow!” 

Really, he rose into the air and flew to where he had seen his uncle’s 
head. When he got there, just as he was near, that raven croaked. 

At that the wampum-headed one came.out of the lodge, and hallooed, 
crying, ‘Someone is trying to rob us of my lodge-emblem!” 

Then that swallow fled, and was pursued and close pressed on his way 
home, for if he were overtaken, he would be killed. At last he arrived 
where his younger brother was. Then he was left alone. 

Then the younger lad spoke to him; ‘How did you fare?” he asked his 
elder brother. 

; “ie. Just as-I got close, that raven croaked; my coming was per- 
* ceived.” 

“Well! Now, let me try!” said the younger Jad. 

Then the younger brother went out of the lodge. > 

“Now, at the very first I did think that I should be a hawk!’ he said. 


So he turned into a hawk; he rose into the air, flying high. Whenhe . 


came to that place, from on high he attacked the raven. When the raven 


saw him, it would not.croak, for it feared the hawk. The hawk snatched . 


_ that head and made off in flight. Not until he was far on his way did the. 
raven croak&Though that person came running forth from the lodge, 


by this time the other had flown far off on his course. 


“Alas!’’ he cried; “Go in ,pursuit! We have been robbed of my 


head!” he cried. 


> They turned into all mag ber of creatures, a8 they went in pursuit. 
The hawk was swift; he left beltind all that fly in the air. 


<té 
AY 
rm 


When he came near, he cried, “Brother, open the door! Try to pull .’ 


our uncle to his feet!” he told him, 

When, accordingly, the other threw open the door and made ready to 
pull him to his feet, by that time he was close by. ; . 

“Here it comes, brother! Rub his mouth!” he told him. 

Truly, that head flew into place, and the elder lad rubbed his mouth. 
So he came to life. ‘All those who had given chase went. back. Those 
boys rejoiced that their uncle had come to life. 

“Now then, let us go home! Let us take our uncle home!” | 


They stepped out of the lodge. His arrows and his head-dress, only ~ - 


these he took whose-head-was~beaded, aa they stepped forth from the 
odge. a oe, 

“Now, younger brother. let me be the one to take our uncle.” 

“Very well.” , 


as 


aS 


‘ ™ 
& 


wes 


161 


Then, shooting an arrow, “Come, uncle, on this we others shal] stand 
as we go. In the grove this side of where we live, there we shall come to 
earth,’ 

Truly they went along, two of them standing on hia arrow. Toward 
evening they. came to earth there, and from that point walked:on. As 
that woman was at work out of doors, presently she beheld coming forth 
her brother and her.children, the children walking at either side of their 
uncle: os 
‘At once that woman said to him, “Goodness! My brother is alive!” 
and went to,welcome him, and they went indoors and she set about pre- 
paring a feast. Presently her husband came in. 

“Splendid, splendid!” he said to him; “Truly, after long delay I see 
my wife’s brother!” said that man. 

So there they stayed. Those children did nothing but play with their 
uncle, and now never went off anywhere, but played with their uncle 
indoors. ; . 

“Do not thus with your uncle! You, treat him too much as your play- 
fellow!’ said the woman to her childrén, but, ‘‘No!” said that youth; 
“Let my nephews treat me as their comrade at play; it is to them I owe 
my life,’ he told his sister. 

So at last they were there a long time. That man was always hunting. 
Then at one time he did/not come home, | When he had not arrived by the 
next morning, “Now, my nephews, J, shall look for your father,” he told 
them. , 

“Very well.” | 

So he sought him. Where he came ‘upon his trail, he tracked him; 
it appeared he had come upon the trail of 4 moose; this moose his brother- 
in-law had tracked. At Jast he saw a hill over a ravine‘in which was a 
spring of water. To that place it seemed that his brother-in-law had gone. 
When he came to it, then from where the spring flowed forth, a Great 
Serpent_thrust out its head with gaping jaws, and drew him in and swal- 
lowed him bodily. Whom did he see but his brother-in-law sitting there, 
alive. He, too, did not die. He sat with his brother-in-law, until it must 
have been night. ~ 
_« _ When he did not come home by next morning, of those twins the elder, 

“Let me go look for our uncle!” ae 
“Be on your guard, my brother!” said the younger lad... 
Accordingly, the elder brother set out. There where-it appeared that- 
his father had trailed the moose, there he walked on. At last he came to 
that spring. When he came near, the Great Serpent thrust forth its head, 
gaping, and sucked him in. When he doubled himself up, thinking of the 
knives that grew forth from his elbows, “With these I shall cut him to 
pieces,” he swung them ‘awkwardly, and was swallowed whole.. There 
sat his uncle and his father. . 

Thus came another night. In the morning the younger brother set 
out to look for his elder brother. He came to where it appeared that 
he had trailed a moose. He too trailed it. When he came to the spring, 
ag. he got near to where the Great Serpent had thrust forth its head, again 
it thrust out its head. ; 

“This is the one who destroyed them,” he thought. 


Bay 


162 


As it opened wide its jaws to draw him in, he stood still in place. No 
matter how much it opened its jaws, it could not make him come that 


J “Courage, Great Serpent! Open your jaws! Come out a bit farther!”’ 
he gaid to it. 

Though he continued to encourage it to draw him in, it could not get 
hold of him. It kept coming out farther and farther, and he said to it, 
“Courage!” and it stretched its jaws as far as it could; he doubled himself 
up and swung his elbows out at both sides, like this. He cut the Great 
Serpent all to strips. Whom did he see but his brother, his uncle, and his 
father, coming out from there! For he had slain that creature; so now he 
brought them home. They went home; at nightfall they arrived at their 
dwelling. , . ' 

Then, the next morning, thus spoke that younger lad: “Now then, 
you are too foolish, my elder brother: It seems that you have no manitou 
power; you are always being defeated. It will be better if I tell you what 
IT have planned.” . 

“Very well.” 

“Well then, my father, as for you and my mother: soon there will be 
mortal men; in future time you will stay on the hills; you will be tall; 
thorn-trees you will be called,” he told his father and his mother, “because 
you are good beings.—And you, my uncle, over here in the place of the 
setting sun, there you will have your habitation. ‘The man with the 
beaded head has taken pity on me,’ a man will say; in his sleep he will 
see you, my uncle.—And as for us: here, a little ways ahead there will be 
small stars; they will be near to each other; such will we. be, my elder 
brother and I,” he said to them; “There, that is the way of it; be off!” 

Accordingly, those others went off, When they came to a hill, he and 
his wife, they threw themselves upon the ground; they turned into thorn- 
trees. And those boys went up aloft and turned into stars. . 

And 80 this is the end of the sacred story. 


> (20) Flu te-Bearer 


Coming-Day - 
ki-kisikdw-pihtukiw. ~ 

_ payak ds bma dténaw Gh-misak, éh-méh-mdiawitsik, dh-motutsik. 
Kitahtawd piyak awa iskwiw pakwdtam, éh-kitimakayimat usimisah. 

“ nka-sipwahtahaw ;' ta-kakwé-uhpikiw,” itéyihtam. 
Gh-tipiskadyik, sipwahtéw, ch-tapasit. 

__  maskots, — nohtawiy nikawiy dh-nipahihtsik, dkwah nipdyakun 
nisimis, —— asilei maskols mdiawihkih, dkwah nika-nipahikawin, ” . itéyih- 
tam ; dyak6 uhtsi k-6-sipwihtat. : ; , 

nistwiw Gh-nipat, dkutd miywasiniyiw askiy, misiwd d-sakdyik. 
_, ,, ah, maskéts ota nam dwiyak ntk-otihtik,’! itdythtam ; “ dkusi tit- 
Ohinkiw nisimis, ” itéyihtam. ‘ \ . 
_ pred dhutah usihtaw wikih. kiyipa kisihtaw wiki. dkwah usihtaw 

ashes uhtst lapakwana, d-wih-kakwi-nipahat wapuswa, “ dkutéwahk piku 
nik-oh-pimatisindn nisimis,” Gh-itéythtah. tapwd tapakwiw. dkwah mih- 
tah. mistahih Gwatdw. dkw dh-tipiskayik, é-kih-nipatsik, Gh-wapahk, ndtam 
uldpakwanah. nisu nipahéw wipuswah. : ; 


t 


us 


hay hay | Gkwah nisimis ka-mittsisut 1” itwiw, ah-kiwahtahat. 


lapwi miywiyithtam awa: ndpdsis;ah-pdsimiht wapuswah. dkwah 


Kisiswéw aw iskwdw, dy-asamat usimisgh. . d-kisi-mitsisut, kutakah' mina 
usthtaw, asa mina Gh-ntawi-tapakwdat ; : Gleuyshouhk mana kih-kiwatsih, Gh- 
atuskatahk mihta}i; itah dh-ay-aydt. 

piyisk misikitiyiwa usima, dkwah dy-wsthtat atsusisah, é-kiskindhama- 
wat ta~pmutahkwéyit ustmisah. lapwdé \kaskihtaw d-pimuiahkwét awa 
napésis.  “ maskots kikway wah-nipahtaisih uskinik-tisth,” dh-~itdyiméat, 
k-oh-kiskinohamawat. wiya -tahiu-kisikaw} Gh-nipahat waipuswah, dyaku 
piku Gh-atuskdt, dkwah awa napésis pisisikt Gh-mdtawét pihtsayihk, dskaw 
wayauitimihk, awa piku iskwiw dh-atdskét, mituni kitimakdyiméw 
usimisa, itah G-wiy-dhpikihat. Kitahtawa dkwah d-misikitiyit usima, usthtaw 


“ at 


> utayowinisiyiwa, wiki dh-pikusahk, Gyako whist uskutakayiw dw-usihtat, 


\ Gh-itéythtahk. ue 


mina uldsiyiwa, dkwah wdskwahtémthk uftapiw awa, éh-at-iskinikit ; 
dkwah pdyakwanuhk apiw awa, éh-athuskinikit. namuya dkwa 
papamuhtéw wayawitimihk, naydstaw & tsisut, wapuswah piku éh- 
mowatsik umisah. nama wihkats kitutitowak. 


. piyisk uskinikiw. Kitahtawd utinam umohkuman, G-ntawi-kiskikahahk: 
misdskwatwah, dkwah ahtsépiyah, ch-pihtukatét, d-wth-usihtat, ah-mohku- 


tahk, ohi mina ahisépiyah, atsusisah d-wih-usi fat. ékwah namuya tapwd 
kih-nipahéw aw iskwéw wapuswah. dkwah noktéhkatéwak. pakwdtam aw 
iskwaw a&h-nohtchkatdtsik, usim pdyakwanuhk dh-apiyit usima. dkwah 
awa uskinikiw k-osihtat 6hi misdskwatwah, ulinam isikahikan, d-ntawi- 
wandhikaét mistikwah .uhist, mistiku-wanéhikan. isu usihiaw. dkust 
Gh-kiwét, pdyak piku nipahdyiwa Omisah wa 
é-ntawapahtahk uwanihikanah, nipahéw kihiwa, 

dwakunt mikwanah uhtst usihtaw wipisisah. 4a 
astis miyik, dy~usthtat, ahtsapthk éh-tahkupitahk. ikwah mina éh-ntawapah- 
tahk uwandhikanah, tasihdéw nikikwah ékwah utsékah, dkwah utsékiwayanah 
é-wih-upihtatwanit, nikikwa d-wih-utastutimit, ni ikwaydnah. Gkwah ohi 
kihiwa, uskan étah. umatowahk, utihtsimanikands utinam, kitsuhtsikanis 
Gh-usthtat. ah-kis-osthiat, utinamiyiwa umisah kapwiyah, d-uth-kikamubayit 
kitsuhtsikanisthk. Gh-lagihtayit akutaw. . 


» Gkusi miywaythtan: aw iskiodw, “ dkwah kékway ta-nipahtaw nistm !” 


potih nama wiya wih-matsiyiwa usima, péyakwanuhk ah-apiyit. askaw 
nama kékway nipahtaw wépuswah aw iskwiw. dkupi nama kakway mitsiwak. 
pakwatam aw iskwdw éka d-wih-mdtsiyit ustma j aka kdkway dh-asamat 
usima, dyak ohisi k-oh~-pakwdtahk. mina éh-wapahk, dh-natahk utapakwana, 
nama kikway nipahtaw. ; ; 
Gh-takuhtat wikiwahk, umaskisina éh-pahpa 


. ahahk, ch-kiniwiyikih, 
“hd é ie tlwéw aw iskwdw ; “ taépwd nimihtata 


aka kakway ch-asamak 
dtukdé kiékway ta-ntpah- 


nisim !Vitwdw ; “ dkwah éy-uskinikit, wiyaskuts 
aw iskwdw, Gh-utinahk 


taw, ta-miisiyahk, nitdyihtah, éka k-spayik,” itwé 


mihtah, é-wth-pénahk, “nka-pahtak nisim,”  dh-taythtahk; oma k-oh- . 


ttwal. 

dkus ati-pihtukdw, Gh-ponahk. nahapiw. dh-p 
waniskaw, Gh-utinahk kitsuhisikanis mina wipisisah. dkwah maskusiyah 
ulinam, iskutéw,dh-akwasiwépahahk. dkuieh astaw kustyah, éh-kaska- 
pahtayik, kitsuhtsikanis 6ma ékutah Gh-itisinahk, Gh-miyahkasahk. 


imisthk 6w uskinikiw, 


pre 


* 
mideaner ia eae 


wah. poli &h-~wapahk, ~ 


164 


dkust 6mis ttwiw: “hd dy, nimisd, Gh-kitimakinatan, aka kdkway 
k-6-wih-nipahtéydn, usim mistahi t-dtuskdyin, dy-iléyimitén,” itéw umis- 


. ahi; “ yohidwipinah !” 


yohténam' aw iskwéw, dkwah aw sskinikiw dh-kituhtstkat. ‘Gh-kisi- 
kituhtat, akutaw. kiyipah ka-pdpayiyit apisi-mosusah, ah-mihtsdtiyit, 
dkutah iskwahtamihk d-pimipayiyit, dwakuni ah-pah-pimuwdt. tytkuhk ah- 


mastinahk wipisisah, dkuyikuhk poyow. ‘ahtsi pikuh mthisdt misiaht nipa-_ 


héw. dkuytkuhk tapasiyiwah dyakuni. 
“dh, nimisé, ntaw-utinah nipisisah. mihkowikudwi, kdsthaméhkan, ”- 
idpwd wayaviw aw iskwéw. dh-itapit, mihisét apisi-misusah nipah- 
dyiwa. . - 
“hay hay ! dkwah kd-mitsisut nistmis { ” itwéw, atsusisah bhi dh-wah- 
wihkwatinahk, dh-ati-kasihahk. - . 
Gh-pihtukatat, poti ki-musdskatéyiwa usima, Gh-wawékinamiyit utakah- 
‘piyihk. d-kih-utinamiyit atsusisah, oh btaydwinisiyiwa,, “ nimisd, way- 
‘auiwdpinayt [” 
Gh-wayawiwdpindhk, dkwah umbhkuman utinam, Gh-wayawit. Gh- 
nandtawapahtahk chi ké-wayawtwépinahk, namuya -wapahtam.  dkusi 
Gkwah Gh-wiyanihtakat. ch apisi-mosusah d-kisi-wiyanthat, iyéyaw pamina- 


“ washw. -Gh-kisi-mitsisut, dkwah ow apisi-mosuswaydna ndi windw, é-wih- 


+ 


paswat. ckus uwiydsima pihtukiyawataw. akwah atiht wayawitimihk 
asidyiwa, sdm .mihtsdt kdh-nipahayit. ah-kisi-nahastat, dkwah pihtukéw, 
paskis mina ah-paminawasut, dskaw dh-atuskatat oh apisi-mésuswayana. 
Gh-utékusiniyik, dsay kisihiw, ékwah dh-kaskikwatahk usima ah-utayé- 


winisiyit. , kikats ta-kawisimutsik, Gh-ispaytyik, kisihtaw. itisinamawdw'® + 


usima. pustaydwinisdw aw uskinikiw, adsay mina kutakah paswiw. dkusi 
d-kawisimut awa uskinikiw, awa wiy iskwéw atuskatéw apisi-moswaydna. 
‘piyts. d-nohtéhkwasit, kawisimow. . kiksdpa ah-pdkupayit, dsay. usima 
simatapiyiwa. dkusi paminawasow. G-kisi-mitsisutsik, dsay mina aw 
uskinikiw iskutéw utinam, mina ah-miyahkasahk ukituhtsikanis. 

. “yohtéwapinah, nimisé 1” itéw, : 

” G-ki-yohtdnahk, kituhtéw. akwah wawaskdsiwah déyaké pdisiméw, 
dyakunih dkwah ah-notsihat. iyskuhk mina Gh-mastinahk wipisisah, dkuyi- 
kuhk mina tapasiyiwa. 

“Gd, nimisd, utina nipisisah 1” : : 
Gh-wayawit aw iskwiw, G, mihtsat dkwah wawaskasiv. ; 
_ | héy hay ! mohtiy ékwa ék Gh-nohtéhkatéyan !” itwéw aw iskwéw, 
ht Gh-wah-wihkwatinahk ateusisah. 
ah~pihiukatat, dsay mina kih-misdskatdpiyiwa usima. 
hd, mmisé, Gyakunih anih wayautwépinah |!” itéw. . 

_ Wayawiwdpinam. dkwah uméhkuman utinam aw iskwiw, a-wih- 
wiyanihtakat, nama kikway wapahtam usima utayéwinisiyiwa, ‘ayis Gh- 
wapinamiyit. dkust dkwah mina. wiyinihtakdw, ah-kisi-wiyinthtakdt, . 


dkuyikuhk dkwah kisitépow, é-wth-mitsisutsik. piyisk mitsisowak, d-kisi-_ 


mitsisut, tydyaw dkwah usihéw pisi-mdswaydnah, dkwah. pdyak wawask- 
asiwa, wawdskdsiwaydna, iyikuhk dy-utakusik, kahkiyaw kisthtaw, dkwah 
pitah dh-paminawasut, ah-Kisi-mitsisutsik, dkwah kaskikwaséw. dkwah 


Kisthtdw taht tipiseyat usima,  tydyaw dkwah pasam pahkékinwah. 


piyis. mistaht 


... 4 good instance of bravado: one lets a bad situation go far, and then, before acting,. 
belittles the danger by. giving 2 trivial reason for the delay. . 


tipiskdyiki, dyikuhk kawisimow. tytkuhk . dh-pakupayity °° 


165 


Gkuyikuhk sdsay waniskdyiwa usima. kakwdydhiw dh-paminawasul. 
mayaw ah-kisi-mitsisutsik, dsay mina miydhkasamiyiwa ukitsutsikanisi- 
yiw, ; ; 
“ yohtdwépinahk 1” 
d-yohtawapinahk, kituhtaw. dsay mina pitsimaéw moswah,, ‘»Gkwah 
dyakunth mina éh-notsihat. iyikuhk mina éh-méstinahk: ‘wipisisahy-poyow. 
6 &, nimisd, ntaw-dlinch nipisisah |”? 
Gh-wayaunt, mihtsdt dkwah méswah. 
“hay hay "hay ! Gkwah éké mayaw ka-nohiahkatayahk !” ttwéw aw 
iskwdw, dh-dt-utinahk atsusisah. . 
_Gh-pihtukat, dsay mina muséskatépiyiwa. 
“a, nimisé, ékunth anth wayawiwapinah !” itaw umisah. 
wayawiwapinam ; ; dkuyikuhk uméhkuman dh-utinahk, dh-wayawit, * 
d~wah-wiyanthiakdt. akwah wiyanihtakdw. a-kisiyinihtakat, dkuyikuhk — 
dkwah paminawasow. é-kisi~mitsiautsik, dkwa mina éh-usihat ‘apisi-mosus- 
wayadna, padyak minah wawaskdsiwékin, “ tsit-dlakuhpit,”’ dy-itdyihiah,-_ 
kikdis dh-att-tipiskaytk, kisthidw, pita min dkwah éh-paminawasut, é~wih- 
asamdl usima. tapwd é-kisi-mitsisutsik, Gkwah kaskikwadsdw, aydwinisah ° 
dw-usihiat. maywds kawisimuyit usima, dsay Msthtdw, adkwah :kutakah 
dh-pdswat apisi-miswaydnah ékwah mbéswayanah., iyikuhhe iskuh ,d-ndh- 
tdhkwasit, pon-atuskiw, d-wih-nipdt. dh-wipahk, d-waniskat, dsay ki- 
simatapiyiwa.. distma, dkusi' dkwah ati-paminawasow,. d-wih-mitsisutsth. 
mayaw é-kisi-mitsisutsik, mina miyahkasamiyiwa kituhtsikanis. yohtawa- 
pinam aw iskwéw, é-kituhtayit usima. Gdkwah mustuswah pépayiywa, 
dkunih mina ah-nitsihat, dyikuh mina ch-mdstinahk wipisisah, dkuyikuhk 
poni-nipahéw. 
“ dkust, nimisé | utinah nipisisah | ” itéw. 
dh-wayawit aw iskwéw, dsay mina miywayihtam. 
“ hay hay |! dkus atsik éma aka wihkats kd-kota-mitsiyan !” ttwdéw aw 
iskwaéw, dy-ah-utinahk atsusisah, - 
Gh-pihtukat, dsay mina ki-musdéskatépiyiwa ustma, 
‘a, nimisd, dyakunth wayawiwapinah !” ik; “  Gh-manah-mistah- 
. dtuskahiten, Gka k-6h-ma-matsiyan, ” ataw, 
akust wayawiwapinam aw iskwéw, dh-utinahk windhikuman, é-wayauit, 
Gh-wiyanihtakat. .iyayaw iyapdsisah wiyanihaw. 
’ “ ayakunth ékwah t-ttakuhpiw nisim," itéyihtam. 
é-kisi-wiyanthat, pit dwakunt “pihtukahaw, itah ta~pasdyit dh-kikamuhdt. - 
dkuytkuhk dkwah d-ntawi-wiyanthtakdt. dh-ay-dpihta-kisikdyik, pit aékwah 
paminawaséw, é-wih-asamat usima. é-kisi-mitsisut, ikwa mina usihdw pisi- 
mésuswaydnah, dh-kisthat, dkwa min ohi mustuswayanah. éh-utakusik, 
kisthiw. pit ékwah mina paminawaséw, dh-mitsisutstk. é-kisi-misisussik, 
dkwah mina Gh-kaskikwasut, mistahis dh-tipiskayck, kisthtaw ayswinisah, 
dkwa min dwa uskinikiw Gh-pustayowinisdt, ‘awa wiy iskwéw dh-ay-atuska- 
tahk uwiydsima. dyikuhk mistah ah-tipiskaytk, kawisiméw. dyikuhk ch- 
pékupayit, kayaptts nipayiwa usima, tyéyaw d-paminawasut, d-wih-asamat 
usima. dytkuhk a-kisi-paminawasut, waniskdyiwa usima, dkwah ah-mitsi- 
_sutsik, d-kisi-mitsisutsik, namuya Gkwah miydhkasamiyiwa. dkwah wiya 
wayawiw, dy-usthtat itah é-wih-akutat uwiyasima, tasipitsikan. dkusi dkwah 
é-sakaskinahtat déwaku tasipitsikan, kutakah mina usthtaw tdsipitsikana, © 
ékutah Cdstat uwtydstma., ptyisk kinwdsk atuskdtam, G-nahastat wiydsah. 
iyikuhk ah-kisihtat, dkwah usthiaw pahkdékinwa, ayowinisa dktvah d-wiw- 
usthituwat usima, tapwd ah-kisihtat, ah-pah-pimikitank, Mage 


Ste 


166 a 


__ kinwask dkwah dh-aydtsik, Gmis ttwéw aw uskinikiw: “haw, nimisé, 
kiydnaw tst pikuh éma k-dsindkustyahk ? ” ttéw. 

“a & d, nisimis, mihtsdtiwak dma ayisiyiniwak, tapiskots kiya dkwah 
niya dkutéwahk dy-thtatsik ; maka namuya kwayask déy-itatisitsik, dh-mah- 
mawinihituisik, siydkotsihitutwdwi, dh-nipahitutsik. dywaku édh-~pak- 
wdtamdn, ké-kth-pd-sipwihtahitdn, ch-apistsisiyan, ‘ maskéts wih-ohptkit- 
sth,’ é-kihatéyimitan: td isi @pihta-kisikak ist mihisdtiwak aytsiyiniwak,; 
méka d-matsi-nétsihtatsik,” itéw'; “ iskwéwak watsistwanihk ch-akustistk, 
awiyak uskintkiw dkuid tékuhtdist, dsay.d-sithkimtht ta-kihtsdkusit, utthiatst 
awiyak ta-wikimat.. maka _néhtaw nthtsipayiwak uskinikiwak, dh-nipah- 
isthkik. dkust_ dyakunik dh-ati-mowdisik. . éwaku namuya miywasin. 
‘dkwah 6té maémthk, dkuté misdw bténaw ;* dwakuntk é&h-kd-kakwd-nakatit- 
uisik, awiyak ndkatihisih, é-misi-wandisthiht, min dyakunik. Gh-motutsik. 
. Gyaks uhtsi, ‘ pitand uhpikihak !' k-6-kth-téyimitan. ayiman nanitaw ta-kth- 

'  ituhtdyin, ”- ttéw usima. . ‘ , 

“ha, nimisd, wipahkih nka-sipwéhian,” itéw.  - 

maibw aw iskwiw, &h-pakwatahk d-wi-sipwéhidyit ustma, ‘“ maskots 
ta-misi-wandtsihaw, ” éh-itéythtahk.. 

ékust dkway d-tipiskak, kawisiméw. kiksépad waniskéw aw iskwdéu, 
d-wi-sipwahtéyit usima, ch-kisitéput. dh-kist-mitsisut, wawdyiw aw uskini- 
kiw, d-pasikot, ukituhtsikanis 6ma dh-tdpiskahk, Otah dh-astat uspisk- 
wanihk kitsuhtsikanis.” : ae 

“a, nimisi, awiyak wah-wihitsth, ‘ upiptkwan-ka-nayahiahk’ nik- 
dsiythkasun,  itwéw aw uskinikiw, éh-ati-wayawit, d-sipwahtét. 

apthta-kisikahk ist sipwihtaw, dkuté watsistwanithk k-akusiyit iskwéwah, 
dkunth dh-ntawadpamat. niswaw dh-nipat, dkuyikuhk utihtam dténaw. 

Gh-takuhtat, “ dwah6-6-6, upipikwan-kd-nayahtahk takusin |” itwéwan. 

ha, pdyakwayak -ntumaw. ‘mistahi miywdyihtamwok ok aytsiyiniwak, 
“Gkwah ké-mitsisuyahk |" dh-itéyihtahkik, —_ 
_. Gkutah ayéw wisahkatsahk, oh skimawa dh~uy-dhtdwihkat, oh oskinik- 
iskwiwa dh-usimit. tdpwd ch-tipiskayik, ituhtéw wisahkdtsahk. dh-pthtu- 
kat, apiyiwah shi uskinikiwa. oe 4 a 

“ upipikwan-ké-nayahtahk, mana kipdé-wiwih nisimak,” itaw. 

“ namuya !” itik. ; , ; 

“G, namuya ! wipahkih ka-ntaw-wiwin nisimak: utihtatwawi, kika- . 
wiwin, watsistwanthk ah-akusitsik nisimak,” itéw. soe 

cha? ' ” tthe, . : 7 

lapwé kiwéw wisahkdtsahk. : 

“ ah, nohtch, ch-pd-wiwit ds ani upipikwan-kd-nayahtahk, ” itéw. 

‘ daha’ !” dtwéyiwa. ‘ “ 

= “pis wapanyiw. wayawiw kikisépad, ah-kisi-mah-mitsisowiht awe 
whsahhatsahh, pany y apa, ah wisi mah mitsisoutht 

“haw, haw, iyiniwitik, pé-wayawtk, “pi-wayawik !- upinikwan-ka- 
_ nayahtahk pa-kitépamik, G-with-nitawi-wiwit ph ‘twa, ah-ali-sipudhidt. 
| a, kahkiyow aytsiyiniwak tuhtéwak, ékwah d-wihkwapitsik iawayihk 
dkutah ch-isimasut awa misttk. ah-kisi-apitsik, ka~pd-takuhtat upipikwan- 
' ka-nayahtahk, éh-kitépamat, tsapasis ayayiwa watsistwanthk, dh-takuhtat, 
simak Gh-ati-mdtsikiyit. dkusi d-wih-utihtat watsistunihk, pa-pakamah- 


~ 
apiritan the succseding episode Wissbketebabk seems to play merely the role of one of the 
; . e end o id i The same i - 
version obtained on Star-Blanket ‘Reserve. © 18 more in character. «The © is true of 8 


J . : ° 


167 


wiyiwa ‘mistikwah ; kaéwi kinwdskustyiwa. dkwah dkuta wipisisah apat- 
sihtaw, dh-uhtsi-kihtsékustt. miydstinahkih, dh-pa~pakamahwat _Upthiat- 
wanah, kawi sdkaskindyiwa wipisisah. 
akusi takhih é-sipwéydhtawit, wiy dwa wisahkdtsahk tahk. anvitapit, 
“ asawapamthk, ta~pdtakutsthk upipkwan-kd-nayahtahk !” dh-atwét wisahk- 
aisahk, 
piyisk néwaw é-yahkimuyit hi mistikwah, namuya dkwah wapaktam 
askiy.. haw, utinam umistanipiwayan, Gh-potatahk. 
_ “uléh tahkuhts watsistwonihk nika-ponasin, ak tekeundwak itah k-apit- 
eik 1" ttwdéw. 
tapwé dkutaé pindsiw. 
“ dkust maka ké-wikimitahk {” itik iskwéwah. , - 
se ahd I: 4) 
utindw oh dsimimawa, &h-nihtsiwépinat. 
tahk éh-asawapit wisahkdtsahk, kitaktawa ka-pdtisapamat, “ hywow pp. 
Gh-sdkowdt ; -“ dkwah piydtakutsihk upipkwan-ka-nayahtahk |” 
utah dh-s-dhisiskawapit wisahkdtsahk, dkuiah pahkisiniyrwa. -awin oh, 
dsima { mitunt, wandistpayiyzwa. ; 
> “ awass | ” itwaw utsahkdtsahk. 
kutakoh min Ghi nihtsiwépindw. ptydtisdpamatsth wisahkdtsahk, dsay 
Gh-sékowdt, ““dkwah piydtakutsihk upipikwan-kd-nayahtahk !” ah-itwat, 
maka “piyakisiniyitss, namuya kwayask isi-waépamdw usima. ndapdwisiw. 
dkweh awa upipikwan-kd-nayahtahk potdtam uma mistanipiwayan. 
 wahyaw 6té nka-nthtdsin 1” ttwiw. 
dkust wisahkétsahk omis ttwiw: “ha hah ! tapwé nikakwayakilik, 


‘ nistma kit-isi-napaiwisiyan k-dsiwadpinat !” itéw ; “ tanté kd-pihtsak askiy 


titimuyin? niyah kiwth-niawi-nipahitn, upipikwan-ka-nayahiahk ! king- 
pawihin 1” 
dkust dkwah Gh-ntunikat,, Gh-wih-waskdpahtat, Gmis ist, taniah ta- 
rahtakusiyit déh-ntunahk. kitagtawd miskam itah dsah dy-dh-tapasiytt. 
ékwah mithtaw. 
“ namuya ka-kth-wanihitin, niyo ka-kih-usthtayan askiy I” ttéw, ah- 


_ mitsthisrpaytstawdas. 


kitahtawad with-atimik. ' 

Gkwah Gh-pdtwéwitamiyit wisahkdtsahkwah, “haw, otah ta-wth-kdy- 
as-dyvwiw atsusis 1” itwéiw’ awa upipikwan-ké-nay yahtahk, dh-kd-kétashi~ 
sindt, ' d, nimaskisinitik, tapasik !" Gh-itwit. ; 

te yahé !” viwdw wisahkdtsahk, Gh-wapahtahk 6m disusis; G, kiy 
éma_ upipikwan-kd-nayahtahk |’” tam: -dtsusts, &h-wd-wdpahtahk ; “ ya, 


-mak awa k-atimiskanawat ! Gh,.kayas nimusémipanak tah ka-kih-notini- 


luistk, akuspth omah G-kth-patahututsil um dtsusis |” itwéw. 
ék ist_ Ghakatawipinahk, dkwah mina dh-nawaswét. mayaw ah- 
dkawdwét, kunt ud isi tapasiw dkwah awa upipikwan-kd-nayahiahk, wisah- 
kdtsahk iyikuhk itéh ah-ponihtiniyikih maskisinah, pa-kiwiw. 
“yoh 1 ayokw dtstk. dna upipikwan-kd-nayahtahk k~ayisi, thud ! ” itwdw ; 
“namuya dkwah. kika-wanthin !” itdw. ; 
Gh-takupahtat, awénipan atsusis,. dsa kah-tapasiyit ! 
“ winikunimahkay !" itwéw wisahkétsahk, dsay mina Gh-nawaswal. 


a 


i Cal made with palm alternately pressed over mouth and removed. 


a 
« 


168 


kitahtawd mipla dkwah d-wih-atimdt, kékdts dkwah t-dtimaépamdt, 
Gkuytkuhk ch-asKéwét, Gmis itwdw aw Spipikwan-ka-nayahtahk : * haw, 
' nik-iskwdwin | nka-pwawin {” 
tapwd Gus tsindkusiw., G-sdkdéwdt, awin oht, iskwiwah ka-papdmuh-. 
layit. ° 
“ngmuy dkwah kika-waydsihin | kiy oma, upiptkwan-kd-nayahtahk { 
siskwets kiwth-pakamahuin ["” 
matow aw iskwdw. 
‘min disik an Gwaku aka: ka-kitimakinawit 1 étah ka-pimpahtat, 
a ‘ Gkaya nakasin ! ahpoh ka-wikimitin 1’ dh-atitak, aké ka-tapwdhtawit i 
kayds Gh-niawi-monahikahk G-kth-wanisiniyan, ” itwaw aw iskwdw ; “ dkus 
| <Gh-dt-atak, ‘ haw, asim wisahkateahk ninawaswatik, é-wih-nipahit.! ; nitik,” . 
' ttwaytwa. 
“a, namuya | “‘namuya Fika-waydsimin | kiy ma, upipikwan-kda- 
nayahtahk 1” ttiw, 
. “ kiydm -kitimakéyimin | aha wiya nakasin | ahpoh ka-wikimitn 
; iléw wisahkdtséhkwa, 


“ mahti maka nipaw otahk 1" itaw wisthkataahk. 
Gkwah Omisi totam, d-wth-lahkinat. © °- 


“kah ! tapwé Ge dni kiya iskwéw k?” "itaw j “nahin 6tah; nika- 
niawi-nipahdw upimkwan-ka-nayahtahk ; mitunit 6ma nindpburhth nisima 
é-nithtsiwipinamawit.' dkaya néntaw ituhld 1” itaw. 2 8 

“ dha’ | kiyipah mdka takuhtéhkan,” itik. on ° 

“ Ghe’ . dkutah péhin, niwitkimakan 1” itéw. " oo 

akust é-sipwdpahtat, mayaw dh-dkavdwit, tapasiyiwa. "maka ming 
wahyaw Gh-aydt, umaskisiniyiwah piku kiy-astdyiwa. 

“Ghéhé | ékuta mana kah-kistwéayit upipikwan-kd-nayahtahk ! namuy 
dkwah kika-wayésthin | itah dkwah ké-wapamitan, dkwah ka-pakamahutin { | | 
. ka-nipahitn | kikistwi-ndpawihin, misimak aka kwayask dh-isiwépinama- 
~ wiyin 1” itdiw. —. myer 
éh-takupahlat, awinipan ah iskwdéwah, dsa kah-tapasiyit. Ban ER 
. “ha hah! dkutgh mana kah-kisiwahit upipikwan-ka-nay yabtahkT 7% 
namuy dkwah ‘ka-wanthin ! dkuytkuhk mistahi ciepimipahiaye. usa 
; Gh-kisiwi-tstsihiyin, tskwéw Gh-itéyimitan |” 
a . Kitahtawd Gh-pa-pimipahtat, dsay mina hisiwak askok. - , 
ro “haw 1” itwéw, mistikwah Gh-utinahk, tapiskéts waskahikin, “Gh 
‘ itastt ; “6 haw, ta-kayas-dyiwiw waskahikan. 1” std y 
‘ _  nisUu mina ’ mistikwah titindw, ah-poh-potatat. 
. “haw, kiyawéw iskwdwak, kik-ikutéwindw¢ 


pe 


; spiltiviteetniobt 
tsan ! mituni nka-kawikth- 


, , wak t dkwah: niya ni) a-kisiyiniwin Gpthtryuky 
my kin 1 thodw. + : / 
tapwé kistiyiniwiw. pihtéayihk aydy, “Kitahtawé’ wisahkdtsahk ka- 
ear Caas we chard waskahikanis. 4 / . 
i hdw, ,whistta u kika-pakaptahuté ! kiy 6ma, upipikwan-ka- 
» nayahtahk; Pete iiw. oo, . yes 
. gh-at-takulpahia, hapa wa yaunyit uskinikiskwiwa. mn. upinikiuun~ 
tkih- tsiwi-né pai, in l soskwi dkwah kika-ni ahitn, upipikw 
of. _ké-nayahtahk J” ‘aléw, aa, P » ENP 
6. ‘nd nd, min Gistk Gn dyako cha kixtapwihtakuyahk ! ¢ awiyak utihtikuy- 
atte -wikimahkak, , obi tikes nohtdwinan, usém ah-kiséyiniwit, aka ; 
/ Lo ; 4 


AN ret 
ae 


169 


ah-kth-pamthikuyahk, Gh-at-tiydkuyahk. ‘usém wisahkdtschk nnawaswétik, 
d-wih-nipahit, ’ k-dtwat aw otah ka-pimamut, kiya kdkuts kitimakihtawinan i 
ahpoh d-isi-nisiyahk ka-wikimitnan |” itik. 

“ yahoh | tapwad nnbhté-wiwin apihtiyukusisaniskwdwak |! usdm nndst- 
usin. pita nika-kapdsin. wdpahk iytkuhk, nka-ntawi-nipahdw.  kih- 
nipahakth, dkuyikuhk ka-pd-pamthitinaéwdw, ” itéw. -! 

* mihiuké maka 1" itik. * 

ah-pihtukdt, awin shi, kiséyiniwaéndésah lth-apiyiwa. 

“ ay, tapwd kitimakisiw kéhtawiyiwdw 1" 

bt héhad’ . ay . 

“‘ ka-pamihitndwawan, k-dsi-nitawdyihtahk kohtawiyiwaéw,” itéw. 

ah, apiw nipdwinthk, tahk dh-masihikut, dyfitaw uhtsi ch-apiytt. 

piyis d-tipiskdytk, “ nndstusin, niwittk. pita nipdtan,”’ itéw. 

dkwah kawisiméwak. péyak wahtiskawisindstdwatsi, kwdskipitik ,ohi 
piyak, “ pé-kwéskisinih 1” Gh-itikut. piyisk kapd-tipisk dkus ch-t6 taNeuit 
noma kth-nipaw. iyikuhk kékdts ch-wapaniyih, dkuyikuhk mituni ndstultk- 
wasiw. mayaw kd-nipat, tapasiyiwa bhi kiséyiniwandsah. 


dmis itiw kahkdkiwah aw opipikwan-ka-nayahtahk : “* Gtah nisihk 

akusi ! ‘ waniskah, wisahkdteghk !’ itahkan ; ‘ kki-nawaswah }” itahkan ; 
‘“ mak dn dkwa nikisiw-itisahuk tr” kitik, 5 itihkan ; ‘“ itah atimitsih ” 

’ dkwah nka-nipahaw 1” kittk, ’ ttahkan. ” A 


dkus is dh-sipwéhtat. 
“ ta-wih-nama-kékwayiw oma waskahikania !” itwéiw, dkus dhug’ dh- 
sipwahtdt. 
kitahtawé ké-kah-kitut hahkakiw. pikumik wisahkitsahk. ah- fohkapit, 
awin 6ma, wayawitimihk kith-nipdéw.! dyitaw, btah mistikwah kth/pimisini- 
yiwa ; ; dwakunt “ iskwiw "-kd-kih-itdyimat. 
hiteah nihundmahkay ! fan-tahtwaw ékwah ka-waydsthit 1 ta wisah- 
ated. 
éh-kituyit: ansatbon, “6 i, wisahkdtsahk f. « nieiwahilé dah 1? kitik 
/ aw opipikwan-ka dyahtahk ; ‘ itah dkwah atimitsih, rule pipenae Gkwah 1’ 
tik anith rrp nainal ” wk, 


a jtwdw wisahkdtsahk ; “ ta-wih-ta-taé ‘apes bya 1” iwadw . 
wisalikited iG « ‘dsay 6ma nistwaw niwaydsihik, muya wihkdts dkuyi- 


. Kkuhk. awiyak. niwaydsimik 1” itwaw ; “ha, nika“poniha ! nika-kiwan;”’ <q 
«  ttwiw f* dkus ani é-pimitisiyin, upipikwan-kd-playahtahk {” hwdw whsahe ane 


k. 3 
Gleuyiuhk ch-iskwak Glayohkéwin, / —— a re 
/ 

The story goes that there was this. Aig town. where they alwpys | had 
contests and ate each other. Then af’ one time a certain, woman. took a 
dislike to this, because she loved her little brother. 

- “T shall take him away from here; I shall try to have bint grow up, ” 

™ she thought. , Vi a ” 
~ ‘In the night she went way, fleeing. 

. “Perhaps—since my father“and my mother have been killed, I am 

now alone with my little brother—perhaps, if there is another mass contest, 
I now shall be killed,” she’ thought; that was why she went away. 

After two nights’ journéying, she was at’ a place where the land was 

good, with woods everyw ywhere, 


& 


170°" - 


“Qh, perhaps here no one will come upon me,” she thought; “In this 
way my little brother will grow up,” she thought. 

So there she set up her dwelling. She quickly built her lodge. Then 
she m@de snares of sinew, meaning to try to kill rabbits, thinking, “Only 
from these’shall my little brother and 1 be able to get our sustenance.” 
So she set her snares. Then she gathered a great amount of firewood. 
Then, when night had come and they had slept, in the morning she went 
to Ilgok at her snares. She had killed two rabbits. 

‘“iood! Now my little brother will eat!” she said, as she took them 


The little hoy was. glad when the rabbita were brought. Then the 
woman cooked them and gave her little brother to eat. When she too had 
eaten, she.made some more snares and went again to lay them; and then, 
whenever she went home, she tended to the firewood, and stayed there. 

In time her brother grew-big, and then she made arrows and taught 
him to shoot. So the bey learned-to shoot. Because she thought, con- 
cerning him, ‘Perhaps he will kill something when he comes to adolescence,” 
was why she taught him. As she killed rabbits every day, she was the 
only one of them to work; as the boy was always playing in the lodge, 
or sometimes out of doors, and only-the woman worked, she wag very good 
to her little brother, there where she -was trying to raise him. Then, 
presently, when her brother grew big, she. made clothes for him, cutting 
pieces from the tent, from whith she made him a, coat and breeches. And 
he sat in the place opposite the deor, as-he'came to the age of approaching 
manhood; he stayed always right there, a8 he came to adolescence. He 
did not go about now oyt.of doors; he did little more than eat his meals, 
and rabbits were all they had to eat, he and his sister. They never spoke 
to each other. * : 


At last he waa a young man. Then at'one time he took his knife and . 


went to cut some saskatoon sticks, and wood for a bow, and brought them 
inside the lodge to work.at them, whittling them, and the bow as well, to 
make arrows. And then the woman was no longer well able to kill rabbits. 
Then they hungered. ‘The woman was grieved that they should hunger 
because’her brother always stayed right there. When the youth had pre- 
_pared those saskatoon sticks, he took an ax and went to set a trap’of 
boughs. He made two of them. Then when he came home, his sister had 
killed but one rabbit. In the morning, when he went to look at his traps, 
he had killed an eagle and an owl; one in each trap. He made his arrows 
with those feathers. When he had finished them, his sister gave him a 
sinew, Which he prepared and fixed on his bow. The next time he went to 
look at his traps, he had trapped an otter and a fisher; and now he meant 
to make a quiver of the fisherskin, and of the otter a hat, of the otterskin. 
And from the eagle he took the bone here; like thig, from, thé upper part of 
the wing, and made a flute. When he had made it, his sister took some 
. poreupine-<quills to attach to the little flute. When she had finished it, he 
ungitup. ‘ Loe oe YI 
th Then the woman was glad} thinking, “Now my brother will kill some- 
-.« thing! . ; ne { 


“ay 


’ But she found that. her brother. would not hunt, and did not stir from : 


~ the spot.. Often enough the woman did not kill. any rabbits. Then they 
_had nothing to eat. She was grieved that her brother did not care to hunt; 


MW - 


2 
3, 
“ 


171 PO - 


because she had nothing to give her brother to eat, was why she disliked “Se 
it. The next morning, when she went to her snares, she had not killed 
anything. 
When she came to their dwelling and was shaking. out her moccasins, 
for they were full of snow, she cried, “Oh dear, oh dear! Really I am sorry 
I have nothing to give my brother to eat!” she said; “Now that he is a 
young man, he in his turn ought to kill something for us to eat; so I thought, 
atleast, but it has not turned out that way,’ said the woman, as she took 
up some faggots to put on the fire. “My brother will hear me,’’ was her > 7" 
ideain speaking so. “nr 
‘ “Thereupon she went inside and put fuel on the fire. She sat down. 
The youth arose from where he lay, and took the flute and his arrows: 
Also he took some dried incense~grass and pushed back the fire. There 
he placed the g¥ass, and when it began to make smoke, he held the little 
_ flute over it, perfuming it with the incense. ; 
~ <* At the same time he spoke as follows: “Dear me, sister, it is because 
“ J feel sorry for you that I have not been killing anything, because I thought 
you would have too much work,” he told his sister; “Throw open the 


do Dp}? 
- Ath woman opened the doorway, and the youth played 'on his flute. 
j .When he had done playing music, he bung it up. At once there came 
” running dwarf-moose in great number, and as they ran past the doorway, 

he kept shooting them, He stopped only when he had used up his arrows. 

He killed a great-many of them. Then they ran away. . 
“There, sister, go get my arrows. If they are bloody, wipe them off.” = -- 
Accordingly, the woman,.went outside. When she looked to see, he 

- had killed many dwarf-moose. a 
“Splendid! Now my brother will eat!’ she said, as she-kept pulling 

out the arrows and wiping them. — . 

When she brought them’ indoors, there. was her brother undressed, 
. wrapped up: in his blanket-robe. When he had taken back his arrows,  . 
then, of his clothes, he said, “Sister; fhrow them out of the lodge!” 
‘When she had thrown them out, she took her knife and-went out. 
en she looked about to see the things she had thrown out, she did not . 
. gee-them.. Then she:set about skinning and cutting up the game. -When 
_ ghe had cleaned those dwarf-moose, she set éagerly about her cooking. © 

When she had eaten, she took four of the skins of the dwarf-moose.té dry. 

Then shé brought in her meat. But some-was left outside, forshe had Killed 

too many... When she had arrangéd it all, she came in, and.again ‘attended 

to her cooking, even while working the hides of the dwarf-moose. Towards . 

evening, she had finished tanning them, and began sewing clothes for her 

brother. When it was almost time for them to go to bed, she had finished 
them.- She handed them'to her brother. .The-youth put on the clothes. 

Then she dried some more. ‘Then, when the youth went to bed, the woman 

‘kept on working the moose-hides. At last, when she grew sleepy, she went 

‘to bed. Early in the morning, when she awoke, her -brother was already 
~' gitting up. . Accordingly, she cooked. Whenzthey had eaten, the. youth 
again took some fre and burned incense to his'little flute. . — ; 

{ “Open the door-flap, sister!” he said to her. 

. When she had opened it, he blew on his flute.’ This time, he brought 

ve chase to them. Again, only when he had sed , 


“ae 


deer to his call, and ga 


| up his arrows, did’ théy flee.. 


172 


... “There, sister, take up my arrows!” . 

When the woman went out, there were many deer. 

“Splendid! Now, surely, I shall not go hungry!” she said, as she went 
about pulling free the arrows. ° 

When she brought them in, again her brother sat without his clothes. 

“There, sister, throw these things out!” he said to her. 

She threw them out. Then she took her knife, to clean the game. 
Not a thing did she see of her brother’s clothes; he had cast them off. Then, 
accordingly, she again cleaned game. When she had finished cleaning 
game, she cooked, that they might eat. Thtn they ate. When she had 
eaten, she eagerly went about preparing dwarf-moose skins and one deer- 
skin. By evening she had finished it all, and then she stopped to cook, 
When they had eaten, she sewed. Then she finished her brother’s clothes. 
Then, with zeal she went about drying hides. At last, when it was quite 
dark, she went to béd. When she awoke, her brother had already got up. 
She worked quickly, cooking the meal. When they had eaten, he again 

_ burned incense under his flute. ’ = 

“Open the door!” 


When she had opened it, he played. As before, he made moose come ° 


by the sound, for these he now sought. .Again, when he had exhausted 
hig arrows, he ceased. : 
“Now, sister, go take up my arrows!” « _ 
When she went out, there were many moose. . 


“Splendid, splendid! Now we shall not for a long time go hungry!” 
said the woman, as she set about taking the arrows. 

When she went.indoors; again he sat undressed. 

.. “Now, sister, throw those things out!’ he told his sister. 

She threw them outside; then she took her knife and went out and 
began to clean the carcasses. She skinned them and cttt them up.. When 
she had finished cleaning them she set about her cooking. When they had 
eaten, then she again prepared skins of dwarf-moose, and ‘a deer-hide, 
with the thought, “That he may have it for 4 blanket-robe,” and just as 
darkness was coming on, she had them done, and stopped to cook again, 
, to feed her brother. So, when they had eaten; she sewed and made clothes. 

Before her brother went to bed she had'them done, and already was drying 
‘other skins of dwarf-moose and of moose. When she got sleepy, she ceased 
‘work and went to bed. The next morning, when she arose, her brother 

was already sitting up. So then she cooked, that they might eat. As soon 
_ ag they had eaten, he again burned incense to his flute. The woman threw 
open the door-flap, and her brother played the flute. Then buffalo came 
running, and he made a killing of these too, Again, only when he had used 
up his arrows did he cease killing them. ‘ 
“So there, sister! Take up my arrows!” he told her. 
When the woman went out, again she was glad. ‘ 
‘Splendid! So now, it,appears, I shall never be at a loss for something 
; to eat!” she said, as she went on taking the arrows. ; 

. When she went in, again her brother sat without his-clothes. ; 

“Now, sister, throw these out of the lodge!” he told her; ‘It was 


* 


Lo 


’ ‘because I hesitated to give ‘you too much work, that I never used to hunt,’ ° 


he told her. 


oo ‘ a ) 


173 

So the woman threw them out of the lodge, and took her knife, and 

went out and cleaned the game. She eagerly set about skinning a young 
ull-ca. 

“Now my brother shall have a blanket-robe of this one,” she thought. 

When she had skinned it, she first brought it inside and fastened it to 
dry. Then she went again to ‘cut up game. When noon came, she stopped 
to cook a meal, to give her brother to eat. When she had eaten, again she 
prepared akins of dwarf-moose, and tanned them, and also that buffalo- 
robe. By evening, she had tanned it. Then she stopped, to cook, and they 
ate. When they had eaten, and again she sewed, then, when it was quite 
- dark, she finished the garments, and the youth’ put them. on, while the 
woman went on preparing the stores of meat. When it was entirely dark, 
she went to bed. When she awoke, her brother was still asleep, and eagerly 
she set about cooking, that she might give her brother to eat. ‘When she 
had finished cooking, her brother.arose, and they ate.. When they had 
eaten, this time he did not burn incense. She went out and set up a drying- 
frame, on which to hang her meats. Then, when she had filled that drying- 
frame, she set up other drying-frames,.on which to place her stores of meat. 


She worked a long time at placing the meat. When she.had done, she 


prepared hides, intending to make clothes for her brother, and she finished 
them and ornamented them with quill-work. 

When they had stayed there a long time, the youth spoke as follows: 
“Now, sister, is it only we who look like this?” he asked her. 

“Dear me, little brother,-in truth there are many people-who exist in 
the same form as you and I; but they are not of decent character; they 
always challenge leach other. to contend, and when: they have defeated 
each other, they kill each other. It was because I hated this, that I took 
you away and brought you here when you were small, thinking of you, 
‘Perhaps he will grow up.’ Here, in the direction of noon are many people, 
but they are of evil purposes,” she told him;’ “‘Women are poised aloft in 
a nest, and whenever any youth arrives “there, he is urged‘to climb up, 
being told that if anyone reaches them, he may marry them. But before 
they reach the goal, the youths - fall down, falling to‘their death. Then 
those people eat them. ‘This is no good thing. And here, in the east, 
yonder is a great town; 'the people there run races, and when, anyone is 

_ outrun, he is destroyed, for these people, too, eat each other. That is why, 
‘Would that I might bring him up!’ was my thought concerning you. It 
will be no light thing for you to go anywhere,” she told her brother., 

“Now then, sister, tomorrow I shall go forth,” he told her.  ' 

The woman wept, for she hated her brother's going forth, thinking, 
“Perhaps he will be destroyed. 7° 
' So, when night came, she went to bed. Early she arose to cook for her 

° brother’s departure. When the youth had eaten, he made himself ready 
and rose to his feet, hanging his little flute round his neck, placing it to 

- hang on his back. . 
_ “Now .then, sister, whenever anyone is to name me, ‘Flute-Bearer’ ‘J 


". shall be called,” said the youth, as he stepped out of the lodge and went 


forth.. 
Hé set. out in the direction of noon, toward where the women were 


poised aloft in the nest, for them he was going to see. When he had slept 


twice, he reached the town. 
s3ise—12 pe 7 


i. 


net, 


174 
When he arrived, ‘“Yohoho, Flute-Bearer has come!’’ was said of him. 
Then he was called to one lodge. Those people rejoiced in the thought, 
“Now we shall eat!” 
In that place dwelt Wisahketchahk, having adopted the chief as his 
father and those women as his sisters, And so, at night, Wisahbketchahk 


came there. When he entered the lodge, there sat the youth. 
“Flute-Bearer, it would seem that you have come to take my younger 


sisters to wife,” he said to him. 


“No!” the other answered him. , 

“Oh, yes! Tomorrow you will come to take my sisters to wife. If 
you reach them, you shall have them to wife, my sisters who are poised 
aloft in the nest,” he told him. . ' 

. “Ob, very well,” the other answered him. 

So Wisahketchahk went home. 

“Why, father, it seems that Flute-Bearer has come to take wives,” 
he said to him. 

“Oh, yes!” said the other. 

The next day came. In the morning, when his people had eaten, 
Wisahketchahk went out of the lodge. 


“Now, now, ye men, come forth, come forth! Come look at Flute- 


» Bearer, who is going to take wives!’ he cried, as he’ went out. 


Then all the people’ came and sat in a cirele round where that tree 
stood.upright in the ground. When they had seated themselves, there 
came Flute-Bearer. When he lookéd at them, they were quite low with 
their nest, but as he came nearer, at once they began to rise. And when © 
he was about to reach them in their nest, they would beat the tree; it 
would grow, longer again. Then he used his arrows, climbing by their 


. Means. Whenever he had used them up, he would beat his quiver, and it 


would be full.of arrows. 


Then, as he went climbing on and on, and Wisahketchahk was always 
looking up, the latter cried, “Watch for him, all of you, for Flute-Bearer. 


‘to come tumbling!” \ 


‘At last, when four times the tree had lengthened, he no longer saw 
the earth. Then he took a wisp of fur and blew on it. 
“There to the nest let me be blown, there where.those women are!” . 
; \ ; Nes 


he said. , 


‘ Truly, he was blown to that place. 


f 


‘And so now you will-marry us!” said the women to him. 
“Indeed, yes!” -, ce - Be 

He took hold of the younger one and threw her down. “-... |. 

Wisahketchahk was all the while on the alert, and there suddenly he 
saw her coming, and whooped, “Hoyoyoyoyo! Here comes Flute-Bearer, 
tumbling!” . se, ; 

Right in front of Wisahketchahk, as he sat, she fell to-the ground. 
Why, it was one of his sisters! ........,.2.2.. ee 

“Fie!” cried Wisahketchahk. Wo a 

He threw down the other one as well. When Wisahketchahk saw her 
coming, again he whooped and cried, “Here comes Flute-Bearer, tumbling!” 
but when she hit the ground, in no seemly way, he saw. his sister. He — 


_was ashamed, “ Then Flute-Bearer breathed upon the Ahair of fur. 


“Far yonder let me be blown to earth!” he said.. 


- ’ vou, 
"he 


? 


¢ 
a, 


175 


Then Wisahketchahk said, “Heavens! Truly, he has given me a 
shock, throwing my sisters in a way to cause me shame!” he said of him; 


; “Whereto i in all the extent of the earth will you flee? I shall go out to kill 


you, Flute-Bearer! You have put me to shame!” 

‘Then he made search, running round about, like this, looking for 
where the other should come to earth. Presently he found the place from 
which the other apparently had started to flee. Then he tracked him. 

“Not by any chance shall I lose track of you, I who created the earth!” 
he called to him, as he pursued the trace of him. 

Then, in time, he was about: to overtake him. 

Then, when Wisahketchahk came noisily near, “Now, let there be 
an old arrow here!’ said Flute-Bearer, taking off his moccasins, and saying, 
“Now, my moccasins, flee!” 

“Yoho!” cried Wisahketchahk, when he saw that arrow; “Ho, it is 
you, Flute-Bearer!” he said to the arrow, as he examined it; “Yah, but 
there go his tracks yon way! No, when my grandfathers fought here of 
yore, they-must have missed a shot with this arrow!” he said. 

So he threw it aside, and went on with his chase.. As soon as he was 
over the hill, Flute-Bearer ran off in some other direction. ‘Wisahketchahk, 
as soon’ as he had got to where those moccasins had come to rest, turned 


_ about and came back. 


“Oho! So this was‘the way Flute-Bearer disguised himself!” he cried; 
‘You shall not again get away from me!”’ he told him. ‘ 


When he got there on the run, there was no trace of the arrow, it was 
plain that he had fled! 


“Filthy scab!” cried WisahKetchahk, and again gave chase. . 
Presently, when again he was about to overtake him, and was close 


_ Upon, hig, heels,. Flute-Bearer said, “Now, let me bea woman! ... . . 


ruly, he took that form. When he came over the” hill; "there was 


'& woman walking about. 


“This time you shall not deceive me! : It is you, Flute-Bearer! Now ‘ 
I shal) club you!” 

That woman wept. 

“So it seems that this one, +00, will not take pity on me! That one 
who ran by here, even though I said to him, ‘Do not leave me! I will 
marry you, if you like!’ yet he gave me no heed! A Jong time ago, when 


.we went to dig tubers, I got lost,” said the woman; “Even though I said 


. this to him, he-said to me, ‘No, Wisahketchahk is too hot in pursuit of 


me, to kill me!’ 2, Thus spoke the woman. 

“Ob, no! * “You shall not deceive me! This is you, Flute-Bearer!” he 
told him. ; 

"Do take pity on me! Do not leave me! If you like, I will marry © 


you!” he said to Wisahketchahk. = 


a a a a ee ee 


he said to him; “Wait here for me; I am going off to kill Flute-Bearer; 


’ the fact?is, he has greatly shamed me by throwing down my sisters, Do 


not go off anywhere! hexto . 
“Very well! But bowen answered him, ‘ 
“Yes, wait here for me, my wife!” he said to him. 

83186125 a 


/ 476 


Then, when he ran off, 28 soon as he was round a bend, the other fled. _ 


| Again, when he had gone a long ways, there lay only the other’s moccasins. 


2 you,” he told them. 


z 


 Flute-Bearer!” he called to him. 


“Dear me! This is the way Vlute-Bearer always gets me angry! 
You shaljl not deceive me this time! Wherever I see you, I will strike you 
down! I will kill you! You made me furious with shame, when you' threw 

: . eft) : : 
my sisters down to me in unseemly wise!’’ he cried to him. 

When he came there on the run, where was that woman! Plainly, the 
other had fled. . : 

“Yoho! This is the way Flute-Bearer always. gets me angry! This 
time you shall not escape me! Now I have done enough running, and 
letting you fool me to the uttermost rage, thinking you a woman!” 

Presently, as he ran on and on, again he was close upon his heels. 

“Now!” he said, taking up some sticks and laying them in the shape 
of a wooden house; “Now, let there be an old wooden house!” he said, 


Then he took two saplings and breathed upon éath.* 


“Now, you, you are to be women, half-breed women! “Ana I shall be | 


an old man, a half-breed! I shall be very old!’ he said. . 

- Truly, he turned into an old man. Théy were inside the house. 
Presently Wisahketchahk came running over the hill. He saw a little. 
wooden house. i 

“Ha, I shall club you all the more surely! This is but your disguise, 

When, he came a-running, out from the house came the young women. 

“Yéurhave angered me by ‘putting me to shame! Now i shall kill 
you at once, FRix{je-Bearer!’’ he said to them. ' 

“Gracious, and so this one, too, will pay no heed to us! ‘If anyone, 
comes to where we are, do you marry him,’ our father told us, for he is so’ 
very old, he cannot care for us, though he is with us? One man who ran 
by here said, ‘Wisahketchahk is too hot on my trail; he wants to kill me.’ 
So do you at least hear us with pity. Lf you like, the two of us will marry 
you!” they toldhim. ,.. , . . ' , 

“Really, I do fancy! taking half-breed women for wives! And I am 
very tired. Suppose I do stop here till tomorrow. Tomorrow I shall go 
kill him, When I have. killed-himn, then-T shall come here and provide for 


rn ee 


ca 


“But do come in!” they said to\him. © me 
When he went in, who was that?\ An old man was sitting there. 
“Dear me, your father is really to be pitied!” ; 
“Yes, indeed.” ; . 
_ “I shall take care of you both for him, in*whatever way your father 
desires,” he told them, * * *.* © 4% # & #” # # © 
-, Thus spoke Vlute-Bearer to a raven: “(Perch here on the poplar! 


‘Get up, Wisahketchahk!’ do you say to him; ‘Don’t forget you were . 


giving chase!’ do you say to him; ‘ “But now he has got me angry, chasing 
me!” he says to you,’ do you say to him: ‘ “Wherever he overtakes me, 


_ there I shall kill him!” he says to you,’ do you say to him.” 


With that he made off. - 

“Let this little wooden house disappear!” he said, and off he went. 

Presently there the raven gave its call. It awakened Wisahketchahk. 
When he opened his eyes, what was thie? He had been sleeping out of 
doors! At either side of him lay a stick of wood; it was these he had 


’ taken for women, 


Aen 


ee 


177 


“Filthy brute! How many times has he cheated me!” Wisahketchahk 
. said of him. 

Then the raven called: “Ho, Wisahketchahk! ‘He has got me angry 
now!’ says Flute-Bearer to you; ‘Wherever he overtakes me now, I shall 
kill him!’ is what Flute-Bearer says to yout)” it told him. | 

“Yoho!” said Wisahketchahk; ‘The fellow might be telling the 
truth!’ said Wisahketchahk; “The fact is, he has fooled me three times 
now. Never has anyone fooled me as much as that!" he said; “Well, I 
will leave him alone!. I will go home,’ he said; “So now you have got 
away with your life, Flute-Bearer!” said Wisahketchahk. 

That is the aiid of the sacred story. 


Qt) Sun-Child 


Coming-Day 
ka-kisikaw-pihiukéw. 


kitahtawé, ayistyiniwak ah-pimipitsitsik, “iskwawak paskdwak, nanitaw 
nikutwasik iskwdwak, d-wih-minahikdtsik mistaskusimina. dkutah pdyak 
miyusiw iskwiw ; namuy Gwiya unapama shidwiya ukawiya pimatisiyiwa.' 5 
dhust witsthiwaw "ayaku. Gkwah tahki pimuhtéwak, dh-monahikatstk. 
| Kkitahtawah é-pasahtsayik, dkutah awa ka-miyusit iskwéw mihtsat mis- 
hain mistaskusiminah, ah-monahahk. piyisk usdm-kinwds aydiw. namuya- 
kiskdythtam Gh-nakatiht. tyikuhk ah-kiskdyihtahk, dsay pahkisimow. 
dkwa éh-sipwaéhtat, nam dwiya uwitséwakana. dkus isi sipwihtiw. namuya 
kiskdythtam téntah dy-ituhtdyit uwitsdwakana. oo ; 
kitahtawéh uskinikiwa ka-patsastamubtayrt nipawiw. -utthtik. 
‘“tandhk ama?” itik. pnacae 
miyusiyzwa oh bskinikiwa. gan "he 
“ Gh-wanisiniydn,” itaw ; \ niwitsdwakanak Gh-nakasiggik,”” itéw. 
“kah! kispin kintawdyihtan ta-kiwdahtahitan, ka-kiwdhtahitin.” 
“dha’. namuya maka nikwayask! nika-kih-ituhtahisun, ” itwaw aw 
iskwaw. 
namuya ayisk kwayask isi-nisituhtawdw, ‘ nikinahk d-wih-isih-kiwah- 
tahit,”’ Gh-itéyihtahk ; maka namuya: show uskinikiwah wikiwayihk ~ d 
d-wih-ituhtahikeut, _ 
dkust kiwihtahik, éh-pa-pmuhtatsik. piyisk ah-tipiskayik, mistah ch- 
tipiskayik, kitahtawah kd-wapahtahk mikiwahp Ghmisdyik. dkuyikuhk 
. kiskdyihtam namuya wikiwahk Gh~ituhtét aw iskwdw. akust takuhtdwak. ~ 
Gh-pihtukat, “ dhahdhahd 1" k-dtwiyit pigim Bhtawiya d-kisdyini, 
. wiyit ; “ tsdskwah, nikusis | pitah nika-miyahkasikan, ” atwayiwa, + 
- Gh-miyahkasikat, “ haw, dkwah nistim ta-pihtukdw,” itwéyiwa. 
pihtukdw aw iskwiw. pot ohi kith-wapistikwandyiwa kisdyinjwa Gh- 
apiyit, kd-wapahtahk wiskwahtémihk nandétuhk kékway éh-astdyikih; ayowin- 
isah, minah uspwakanak, asiniw-uspwakanak, mina wiyakanthk, ch-ostigibih 
miinasah Gh-Kisitayik. a a oa 


ant 
Sos 


The speaker starts to compound. Kwayask : “properly” with the following verb::" ; 
This is contrary to habit; .he corrects Himself by starting the verb all over again...f fiave 
often veers the same thing in Menomini, where a similar “incorporation ‘BB permitted 
but awkwar 


1 o . , ° Low 
Bonn . yo / 
oe ys. Ne Oe 


er ve . . ” 


_ pihtukdyit, 0 6 ee 


: gtk. - 


178 


dkust, “ Ghéhéy |" -litwiw awa kisdyiniw; “ dyiman; nikusis, ka- 
pdsiwat nistim !” itwéyiwa; “ kikway kiy-dsamayahk ? pikuh minisah,” 
itwéyiwa, . . _ 

dkwa minisah asamtk. ch-kisi-mitsit, kawisiméwak. ; 

Gh-mékwa-nipat, dh-waskawiyit! undpéma, dsay ka-paéhtahk, “ nikusd, 


, waniska ! aséy wih-kisikdw ! kipamihta kisikaw !”' k-diwdyit kisdéyiniwa. 


tsi-waniskdyiwa. wistah waniskdw, mina minisapuy dh-utinamiytt, 
Gh-asamikutsik Ghi kisdyiniwa. kaskihtdwékin utinamiyiwa, dkwah mihk- 
wakin iytkuhk ka-tdpipayiyik iskwéw t-otasit; dkwah papakiwaydnakin 
manipitamiyiwa. a - 

“ha, nikusis, dyakunih ani nistim ta-kaskwadtamds6w,?” itéw. 

dkusth ah-kisi-mitsisutstk, ati-wayawiw awa uskinikiw. dkwah awa aw 
iskwaw usihtéw uskutakay, kapd-kisik Gh-kaskikwasut. mwéhtsi éh-pahkisi- 
muyit, kisikwasiw, kd-pa-pihtukayit uwikimakana. yah, miywdyihtam éh- 


dkusi utah ayaw, naydstaw minisah Gh-mitsitsik. tapwa kikisépa mana 
dh-sipwihléyit unapdma, ka-kapd-kisik namuya éh-takusiniyit, dyikuhk 
péhkisimuytki, dh~pihtukéyit. dkusi namuya kiskdyihtam kakwayah shi 
unapéma min Ghi usisah. mistaht mana kaskdyihtam, aka wihkats kutakah 
awiya éh-wapamat. . ; . - 

kitahtawah, dh-apit, dh-tipiskak, “nikusis, kiyistkakih ta-kih~papd- 
muhtaw nistim. miydmay kaskdyihtam,” itéw ukusisah. 

“Gha’ ,” itwéwiwa. 

“ ayisk kiyana mina kikth-isih-pakitinikunaw ka-tipdyihtahk kahkiyaw 
kékway, ta-pamthtayan askiy. niya ah-kih-ayimadyihtaman ta~pamihtaydan, 
‘ kiyam wiya éy-usk-dyiwit t-Gluskawdw,’ ka-kth-itéyimitan, ‘ kéhtawinaw 
ksd-manitow,’” k-dtwayit ukustsah. - 


“haw, niwikimakan, aka épiyani, kika-~papdmuhtan dtah. sma mind. 


wasakam ay-thtakunwa mistaskusimina,” itwéyiwa. . - ; , 
tapwé dkust totam ; kd-sipwiéhtdyitsi uwikimakana, éKitsi “wistah & 


papamuhtat, dh-ménahahk mistaskustminah. piydtatsih, witakusiniytkih,-., 
kah-pah~-pthtunahkih, itéh Gh-apiyit usisach, dkuté ah-pakitinahk, utinam’ © | 


mana awa kiséyiniw, éh-nandskumut. “ 

“kakiké ntakawaté Smatowahk, usém wah-wthkats dh-asamikawiyan, ” 
itwdytwa.. ‘ ; ; wh 
 tytkuhk péhkisimuyiki, Gh-pihtukdyit unipdéma, Gkusi dh-asamdt, 


mistaskusimina mina minisdpuy ah-mitsitsik, nama kékway pitus dh-mitsit- 


_ Kitahtawé tépiskayiki, “ha, nikusis, miyghkasika 1” Gh-itwiyit, ka- 
pé-yohténamuht, mana mihkwakin, askaw. kaskitéwdkin, dskaw papaki- 
wayan, kikih-minisapuya, Gh-pihtukdtisinamuht, dkus Gh-utinahk aw uskini- 
2. \ 

Kitahtawé kiskéyihtam aw iskwéw awasisah é-wih-ayawat. 

“haw, ékaya wihkéts dkwah papamuhid ; maskdts kwayask wih- 
wapamayahkuh awa awasis,” itik uwikimakanah,. ; my 
_, apwa péyakwanuhk dkwah ayaw; namuy.dkwah monahikéw aw 
iskwaw ; ayisk kitahamak uwikimakana. “lapwa piyisk nihté-~wipamdw 
ulsawisimisah, Gh-chkusit, dkwah d-wih-waipamdi utsawasimisah.  dh- 
tipiskayik, kah-wapamatsik, uwikimakana éh~pamihikut. pot 5hi napésisah. 


‘tQOne should Ect Seehiont hy bu ” fo 
a pat show orpect ities z udged” to follow the father’s call, 


© 


at 
WE hae 


ce 
ag 


179 


dkusi miyupayiw. dkwah, G, mitunih ayowinisah mihtsét ayawak ; ayts 
namuya kotaw-dpalsthtaw aw iskwéw, ohi utsawdsimisah éw~isi-pamihat ; 
ayisk wiybtisiw awa kiséyiniw. mistahi miywayihiam awa kisdéyiniw Gh- 
uydsisimit, dwaku pdskats dh-kanawdyimat dsisima, tyikuhk éh-miywayth- 
tahk dh-uydsisimit, dskaw piku dh-kanawéyimat aw iskwadw utsawasimisah, 
éh-papdémuhtat, éh-papamuhtahat, éh-kaskéythtahk mana aw iskwéw, aka 
withkdts kutakah awiyah éh-wapamat. * 

kitahtawé dkwah ch-misikitiyit ukusisah,- aékufth ah-papaimuhtsésiyit, . 
kitahtawé maka" mina kiksépad G-sipwéhtéyit undpéma, wistah sipwihtéw, - 


law. 


kuntah ah-papah-sa-sakinwdt. Kitahtawé kd-wdpahtahk | mikiwahprs. ttuh- 


Gh-takuhtat, “ ta-tawaw, nosisimis 1” keditwdyit notukésiwa, 

pihtukéw. — 

- “" aaay, nohkum dtsik awa a itah “Gh-ay-ayat, ké-kaskdythtamén mana .» 
iaw; “kayas kth-kiskéyimitan, otah ch-wikiyin, kah-péh-kah-kiyokdtin, 
nohko, tytkuhk ka-kaskéythtaman mana,” itdw. 

“ hady, nosisi, kikiskéyihtén tst om utah k-aydyan ? ” 

“nama wiya,” itéw. * 

“-otgh Sma’ nihtaskamek G-kih-uhtuhtéyan, kikiskdyima .tsi Gna ka- 

wekimat l” attk. _ . 
“ namuya,") itéw. 

“ k-dyisifiniwiyin, ‘ pisim,’ k-dtwiyin, ékutowahk ana. dyakw anim 
Ghtsi kd-kapé-kisik aka k-oh-apit ; dh-pamihtat askiy, otéh nihtsdyihk Gh- 
kisikdstdskamawat ayisiyiniwah. adwakunik aniki kitdtémak kitahtawd 
mana ka-pihtukdtisinahkik minisdpuyah Gkwah aydwinisah, éh-miythistk 
kiwtkimdkan, " k-dtekut. . 

* haddy, nohko, hah-dth-tsi-pihkuhin ?* IP eB anen ene eee ge 

“ua, nosisd, wiya miskaman mustusu-mdy “sisund sakahl ch-asték, 
kispin miskaman, kah-kth-pihkuhitin. dkutah anima Gh-pakundyak éma 
tle atutah anima ah-uhtsi-pihkuhut mana kiwikimakan, ” attk ; “ nitun- 
a itt 

dkust wayawiw, dh-niunahk, namuya kins notsihtaiv, ah-miskahk. 


nitawaipamdw ohkuma. 


a nohko, nimiskan !” dtik awa notukasiw dsisima. 
“ kus ani, nésisd, kika~pihkuhun. nah oma,” itéw, upisdkanapim, 


‘“.nésisd, mistikuhk tahkupitamohkan. akwah kik-osthtan watsistwan, itah 


hs 


a 


t-apiyak kikusis,” itik; “itap anih nohtépayikth, nipisdkandpim, ta- 
sipdkipayww, ” itik ahkuma ; “ dkwah nata kitaskiy utihtamant, k-apihkundin 
anim itah ka-wih-posiyin. ‘nohko,.dwakwd kipisdkandpim !? kik-diwan. 
ka-pé-uhpiwipindn. itdép anth ta-pahkihtin otd tahkuhis,” itik. 

dkusi sipwahtéw, dkwah ch-ntawth-usihtat watsistwan. 

asay kiskdyihtam awa pisim d-wih-sipwihtiyit Swikimakana ; dsay 
pakwatam. maka nam dskwahkisi-tatipdwdw 6m askiy. 

dkwah awa’ iskwéw Gh-kisihtat, ch-takupitahk. mistikuhk, dh-pakitapé- 
kinisut, dita éh-nohtdpayiytk, talikth sipakipayiyiw pisakanapiy. 

 Gkuytkuhk dh-kisi-tatipdwat awa pisim. ituhtiw ital k-oh-pinasiwdytt 
uwtkimdkana. utindw asiniyah: 

“ haw, tapiyahk niuith-pa-pahpisihaw niwikimakan ! ‘, itaw, akutah d- 
riahikapawit dma ka-pakundyayik ; “ haw, ustikwanihk ta-pahkisiniyiwa 
bh asiniya niwikimékan | namuya nika-pistahwawe pisimowasis nakuysis i” 
tendo ésah, Gh-pakitinat asiniya. 


180 


dihcrn tik hadi, dheprhtukat, 

"nd katnin, hirtukamaw tt, 1th dhettnhuie mlatin 2? 

“Aha®, ndhah-analahwaw ih dheluhtat, dhelawdi," ida, 

“hah Lomatwdn lit kwayank banded niaetma 1 didn, 

" hdha 1? , 

- Ah-hakiodpayaghh, mavithtith dkewah deuth-pindathh’ aw daikwiw, dhayl 
hegehk heatindhut oh duiniya. pahkininiytuna wuiltkwdathh, — paatlpaylylo 
ghitkandply » pakkinin muhinthk bond pahinin, 

Ahunt Akatah poindsin, dkwah aon atvdsta dkatah ayeayiin, dh-nahe 
ninihtahiwut* fia dhendpight ukawtya,  namuya kednkay “Mann Ahendytylt 
ukdantya, platalh dhemamdtiods dhatah, ilah ukdwiya depliniubntyit, piylale 
kidnawisks (ehutah agi, plylik allh-wikindulndyina ukawiya. 

hatahtawd Ah-pupdmd-ma-mitawdl, kdemtuhahh ithh dheagydt awa pilyak 
nikukdnim, kd-ntpahlahk ufdatikanintyloa, nanatuhk kéhmayah dhektatnlhe 
Matyi, namuya kinkdythtiam kidkwayah old ana dwduin, dhautah mana dhe 
mea-miawil, Ohd kdetathdindwah Mhemith-manipllahk, dhemdtawikdl, nanuya 
Ah-atill, kuntah dh-mdtawakal, dAtah(dlath ukduiya, dkuyihuhk mana aaa? 
nitukdnto ubihtum ukdatstkanish, kunta mina ka-pimarddythth, dhemahe - 
mantpilamiyit auiatwah, ha-maldhalt mana, “| Lo 

“allan ton wapamak 1" dyihtam, dhewanlyaldyimal, dheapimniniylt 
pakabkum, dhepldylhlahh. ; 

Aatahtawd dkinh askamawiw,  hatahtawd kttenapabtaytt awantaah, 
meintiahi wmanlyaldyladay, Uh-kitimakinawal, dhe pn pahlayll, “dheuldhtamdiylt 
ukdilnikdndwh, mannakiok mahenandplianiytua, dh-atimdpinandylt, hi 
hithpamian, Ah-wouniyatdylnat, pigink kdwiwak plyayayia, ‘lal Hhepl~ 
fahublagit, Ohl dh-mdh-manipitamtyih mobulastawdw wun nolukdado, bil , 
hiuhh ah-hiskdgimikul, danhelapandtyil, deay neawalindw, dh-anameawlangylh 
tthehanlileut, - . 

“noninindy, nouivimin 1 Abed, dh-apgeutidma, “ bantih omah ah« 
ubbubldyin 6 dw, ; - 

" alah kinknak, "dah, ; 

'  “ nanintmin, nama lyn Wwitdstuahin, ohd nthlotwikaninah kacomini- 
manihsihlayin, nowdle ndotyudyihtdn demdokatan, ! ido, 

Ahan) Ahepukilinal } wputipohlayin, Akanah ay-ankinoo, potih kei» 
aepohlaht: iluah Ahepimiulndyit aniga, heutah takubtdgyhua, 

“kakuay ana, nonled te” dw, Awaken bit ama S naikduiy! bedle 
wdtyon 7 . , 

“haha | kutak mak awiyok namuy aolyak ; doukw aun pila dhe 
ninyahh nokduly, das, 

' hidy, nonivbnda, mistoh Atsih oma Ahekithnakiniyin, nonin | hee 
hawdhtahitin,  kikeayatin, namuy awa dhepinallot bekdwiy, ayla awa 
A hihewipite minaasths whyphuls oleh lhacnvini-manattnin, Ahd nakatataih, anpen 
Aanhuuk none unhkats thus iapayin, dhe bhepimatinit tahah-unts-ayani ht, 
tdi» keakenthitahdbin, itd, 


“ahat pv g 


d 


daddy wo trd; perhapn pondain dyn different word from wie transparent pondaln, 
fortacd with inltlad pone 2 “eons,” taal alas “leone down, fll” and connective ft. 

“nferminnt Sint wid dhene-nah-noktant, where the sia io dip of the tongues; dn 
eorrecking this be subidhinted Ue longer derivative yerl in ius text, 


IHI 

ldywod kiwi-wiladudio oaiutma, takuhtahdw wikihh, hay, hitimahkayi- 
midi f Agtimakinawdio, dheanamat, aeiypwodyihtam awa mapeiaia, dkwah dhe 
wiliddl notukdaiwa, dhaal dhwa pindyimdw ukdiwolya, 

Athahtawdh dah dh-ay-ayataih ohkunta “nduind, tahbaima mana nipand= 
muhliiny kaya wihkdln nanitow dhdld. hanawdythtah mana kikinaw, dakaw 
hitdlphtdyin ndhiatihanlaihh, itd dadaima, 

pode Kitahtawi. dh-hinikayih, “ndaiad, nlwih-papdimuhtin, "itd, 

Ahentanamdin mana baemtayin, h Hidw, “mina dakaw dheltuhtdydn dtd 
sakinthtioak dhavotltalk wah yernda, dik, : 

dunt man denipwdhuiyit, dhkiwah mane wiya dhutah dh-biakwdt, dakew 
autibaniafyihh Ahead, wak-ituhldtal kuntah dh-mdh-manipliahh mana 
ukiatalkaniaiyliod, 
a qmdtikaaihs, tdhvhki aoa natukdatw, Cndaind, kikih-ituhtdn tt nikiat- 
sikaninihh “dha,” dlikutaih, dha dh-ituhtdt, hunta mana kdepime . 
andythih wilatatkaninah, dh-madh-manipitamipit 

“ndintaimia dayne dekakdpatiait 1" itd mana awa nétukdalw, ah- 
pahpit mand, dh-méakinahh, dh-kiwdhtatat,  plyihtubdtai, keGtindt mina, 
Aheiuyeulnindl,  ndainimin, noniainin 2" dh-iat mana. 

Attahtarod ka-hakwdtaimat dlikvmah, dkaoak dh-miaihitit, 

“ndhko, kdlwayah Ohi gv’ dtdw, ainwayah wihkwahl dy-aatwatdyihih, 
dhelahkuptldythih apanihh, - 

“ha, nauind, kunt anthi," ttih, 

naninya wih-uihtaneauidoe kdbwayah alt kedatwatdythih, maka hint 
tan aa giaimhwdaala dhewaskawspaylyihih man ah wihkiwayah, — dhl 
dhata dheaypayatalk, iatahtaudh dha maka mana d-alpwdhtdylt ohkianah, 
kahit aaanalainiadyiioe, dy-unihtal lapakwanan, — dh-kiathtat, 
tahhoayjak Ah-gaknpayigib anihiaiwaw, akutah dh-tapakwil, dhiwah japimihh 
dhekipahahh wniefoae,  dhkiwah pdyak dma wihkway kaepoakuaahh, buntah 
kea-naheaikindylt trahtachkaylwahdhutowahh fia Ohi befialwannyt, — kunt 
dendiheavwdt, “-natuil b, hdtah ha-wih-wayehayit, kabldyaw lepaluaditiio, 
mdituihan, beuntah ebstalab pit, dbwah dh-matawakdl dyakunih, — tytkubh, 
“ ta-takuhtdw, " dh-idiylmat obfeaamah, dkwah pdyakwayah . axakdw, ah- 
tihinoanaliwal, "| dhwah kd-moawaydlihid, ” dheakwinahdt) dheitwdt: " dhoah 
ka-udwayahh nohhium, " thwdu, . _ 

iylhahl Ah-takufldyit, dhedakualalyth, dh-pihhekdyit, Guia itd: 


j 


Mponko, dhiwth ka-urtaiinnanin, "itt, 


FO hahwoay aud ka-wih-aydtamihit nonintiaia BY ith, 

“dyakw datma paakinah, nohka,” : 

dhe pankinahh, cnn Ghi tnahtahhayowa't 

mttoytion dhkuma, | taped alkitimahits noaiagae 1 dhertmdyit) “ vip- 
we hakdvatiato noatnine f° dheitehu, ‘ 2m 

dh-haakiodyit dythadh, dhoah ainiyiou, dh-ponkupitayit, © dh-kiaihayit, 
dhanah pakaatnidyiwa, . 

dih-hininwagit, “nonind, hig pihae mitniaih, ith, 

fag wiyu pila mo-mitatnaw, — tythihh db-kiaput, péni-morwdiw, 
ahdigria, 


A UE UWI id sorrostly recorded, infor wae hertating hatween wa words, akmanahdie 
filo older -ahydin) ober places tin covering’ and adieanediedie she overs hin with 
something, or hy bool! be dather ia atdested by the caauranee of the eorresponding 
form with duwitionie objeai, aiieauhan, aud of other decivadiver} not ao the former, 
whore inaniante would and fy -auntenin, : 


w 


s ik 


rap hiltwdi mtn a-mdudteak, ? lek, 

dhus dheay-aydiaik ua dhutdh, tahtu-bisthaw deadpuedhtdyit: ahkunah 
igikuh nang dhekitunedt ohih taabtahkayaea, daay nding lapakiwdi, dhwah 
mina ispimthh dekipahakk wikdedw, daay ain Omeaserhhway poakusan, 
huntah ka-Aitouee Ouiitsashustaah, Arata mda hdenahoattmddendtalhat, 
tahduh bd-othewagaudpdinutdh, ldpakwatdu. mdstathdie wdha naan 
mina pdyakwanuhh asahdw, dheakwanahwat,  dhuyikuhh kaetakuh 
Ohhumah 
Ome Hd es onohkd, dhe mina keeimnttadaundnaw, " ide, 
o  hikway ated Kaetoth-adandhet adadedae fet ava natukdadw, 

“dvalw data pdakinah, dtd ohne, 

dh-pasktnahk, sdinak dhwa matuycoa, 

“ha, nohko, hivam ape d kunta mana Kematun 1) eta, 

dh-Kiskuwdyit, Onis tikes “Ondatad, tapwd netatahi hikakdpatiain, ithe 
hitimakisivin hoh-hitimakdyimitth, dkwah ka-mdatathateth nitawdaimiaak | 
niawasinisak ok’, nosisa, — adpedhid, ontsawate plydah nantaw heekihe 
tiling kikistwahtn;cdbwoah dheadladethnakdyimitan, tythuhh ka-htiainat- 
sihigin, nikistsihdnisah ina mistah domiatewandtadhtayin } dhiwah nena 
nisthihdhtayak nétay uecele MwPondataihataih, aiya, acmodhta 1 kimana- 
hitimahtlin, dheRil Meee fin, Paitin, ; 

dkusi pasikow, dh-wagatit, Pontprencd tiie, hentia pike ud dad agp 
ide dah dletipishkayth, duntah kawiaimdw,  dewapaniyih, adpwdhtdw, 
dh-dpihta-kaikagth, kabewapahtahh uakiwdhp, dah sitet dheay-ahhiwats 
adioahhasivih, dkutah dhehtdw, pot dma ktemaatnahikatdyio nikewakp, 

dh-takuhtdl, “haha, tawaw, tawaw, patiinawdaia 1 kdonalwdedtodyle 
uskinikewd, 

dhephtubdl, awin oli, ki-wasakdamepliyiwa wudhinikiwa, mituné denah- 
matyulragil, asane pike pihpdsapuwaydna dhevoiyahtandylt 

COtdh uhtad £" dheitikut, namuya tapodhtawdr, 

 atah kip 1) jtaw, ahewrhtctnni hn d-nehapit. 

Mlahtawd, “haya, edad nana mayaw hitasamawaw pradmowdals t 
miyodsindpan dheutihidkguahh 1) kedtoduit. 

“yahd, kikway maka lelih-arauayah t" 

“ladh, Repak aokiaitdh welnastakay mawaterh } kipah taekiaitidw, " 

taped nawate, Aiylpah akwanamiydwa, 

“yahd, matedn tio tama kaitdo 1" dwdyiwas “mahtih kutuih- 
pashihtah / nama pakehkam biaitdw matatkotitan 1" 

dyoku mina paskdhtam 

“nana bathe, itedw min duaku, “mdtadkattda o" 

Kutakah miydw,  uhpind  dheatinpaskidhtabkik. — yntytuls wanakdind= 
paskdhlamwak oka ashinikiwak, 

dat ndha nalebdalw pda nodhitdia, aoa piadnowdaia ka-pdh-naketat 
nalukdalwd, dekrakdythtabk dhoutihtaytt utawdalniaah praindiwaaiaah, dake 
a8 dna notukdaiw OAth utawdadminah uakinikiwa haamitdlantyit 

qiiel kahkiyaw ob dakinikiwak paakdhtamwah, 

“AYaitdw Gav, tlndwak, 

“ah, dkus tal asamihh 1" thea pisimowdataah. 

ulna mohkiman, wirakam dhewaakasahk wna windatakay,  dhekial 
manisahk, sivikuta matuatdwapinam, — dhua Yad wayardyanut, “ himdat= 
aiikunaw prvimowdate 2" keiitwidyit, tnd kahkiyaw nipahdw, — aivikes 


(Hi 

wiayhiodg da Ohi, mdataihdw’ dkual tapastio, Cy 

dkual uaha ndtukdaiw pd-nawanodio, pinimowaaiaah dh-pimitinahweat, 

“dhwah anth kikiatwahin, piaimouiinin, mitunt hd-kitimahiyin, witaw- 
duémduh dkwah dh-mdatathatuih 1? : 

dike tay dhwah nawanwatih dkaoah notukdaiwa, pikw ih dh-itdavut. 
Aitahtawd hianwah dhwah dheankohut, dhwah adhihih. 

wma todos “nihlah, kintwak pimuhtt | nivih-nipahih stnkwiw 
notukdatw |) ititie, 


tapiwd tangata TAA A Ohtawiya yraimwa, — miatahi Miaityiiny 


pipiuh dwih-hiiaue awa notukdaiw, poydio, 

“ahaa anih d-pmatiniyin, gasimowania t ketpinihitin, " itik; 4 make 
dhatah uhlat aha wina, dhaya wihkata mustihtak nahapih 1) dtdw awa 
nolukdarw piaimowaaiaah, 

fapwd nowate dapiithl winutdyiwa bhlawiya, «het. aod notadkdatia, 
dhvwah awa pintmivagla d-pimulldt, minkawdw aniniya dh-napakapinkiatyit. 
ulindw dyakuni, th d-wih-nohapit, dhutah dh-ahal, dh-anankaidt ah dani 
Mah, tahbih dhuad dota, mina d-wik-nipal, dh-andakaant aniniya, wiyde 
-punntyile adepudhtdta:, dh-pineiwihal antndyd, 

Litahtawd Gu dh-papamadtuthut, hituhtawd. hd-wapahtuhk  éldnaw, 
dileutah takiuain, fapatindhh niet, dhehilapahtabk ohi nakiwahpah, 

yaha, piadmawdata takeuain 1" dhodwdn, “ 

ducy piyal pdy-ituhlidyiwa, dh-pi-niemileut, 

“hd, piadmowdata, kivih-pily-ituilan 1” 

“dhe ha." rN 

witeiodip, , 

dh-piktukdt mikiwahpihk, “nha, la-tawiw 1" itdw, 

dh-nahapit, “ha, anamihl kiyipa tf nohtahkatdtuked 2" itéw,., 

“dhidhdhdy, haha, yinimowdnia ! ayiman ani itah ka-taknhteyin 
piadaih: dh-mdtawdhh, dhemanitiwi-mdtawihk,  dkuni niyanin tahkih d- 
wthdluhikawiyihh. day dma kindythtamotukd, d-wih-mawindhaak piwie 
piakitoiuadua”  aydudatw ands nani wihkats niedhotuihanan,  dkuat -he 
adhwayimupdhhuh, ohtaitaw vika-nisi-wandtildkundin, " itedyion, “ 

“namuya dhepapa-mitawmdyan, ” itd, 

“omdakata uhtalaw ka-mawindhukwak,  awiga masa ka-talunindy it, 
nde manwindiaodwak, ” ctaw s mdiba wtakusin anuhia, wapahhei miuabedte 
ka-mawindhukwak, "ita, 

Ghani dhwah aan piyin Upinkayiw.  liyncha kabeadpd, d-bthe 
milucardath, waay kha-tdnedwiht. | 

“hahdw hahaw hohaw | wawiyih | pak-ntawapahhih | wit-andtavtin- 
hot | dhepapd-miitawdl, dh-itodhh, ka-takuhldt adkunihh jasimowaudaia, 
wih-mdlawdw piwapiaku-maukwa f pilrolyourk 1" 

anay pid-lidldyied. 

'Charagtorlatie obxaure paasnge of the type nat dua to mdaanenin diffiouliies of 
(Hetation or resueding, One er inert eau ney he at work, auoh ag tagines, fatigue, 
impationce at the alow pase of dictation, obstructive attitude Laward the ragorder, desire 
to withhold Information from the foreigner, aelant tabu, or traditional omission. Probably 
the lnnl-named wad bere qperdtive informant had hoard the atory told in this way sand 
would vot add te fe For he sould nat be indeed do dletate the explanation which be 
voluntirily gave: he ratiemnke-youtle tive Jett ouch a peldan-faigs in the edga of the 
maw, to ki dia-Child whon he esta. My thrawing thelr dang Tuto tte five he ldits the 


rabilonnishen, 
—Efferary the boar la bear, below, - 


i & ; 


phd 


IBA 
“haw, plaimowania, kiwith-wawdyin, phodpiaku-maakion d-uthemawindl= 
Atak," ad 
dhuai, “haw, dyiwdhk wawdyl,  migawdta Gla dha tdmodhtamant, * 
uhtaitaw ha-hahwd-mini-wandlachil, ” GU? Olea ~wthiythh kd-pihtukdl, sm 
tah heat. Some 

“Aha, nanuya noh-papd-mdtawin," itodw; “dyiwihkh maka,” 
dle, . 
Aina dh-waweyil, ainay tah d-tahtakwahtadaiyih, dhutah dy-itulldyit, 

ha, kigipa pa-wayaui 1" itiw, 

dhkuai wayawiw, Gh-ituhtdl, sisay wthkwdkapawiyiwa, 

dh-takuhtdt, "haw, pruinirwodaie, kipapd-mdlawin, kaitikawin, — kiya 
make vihdn ka-pimutin, * 

"nanny | kiyawiw nihan | dha ma niya wih-mdtaodydn, ” 

“dd' ," thodiw aug wakayaa, 

daay Gita idyihiam s “haw, noha, kiatwak uhtath kanawayimin 1!" 
thud, oneal dh-ildyihtah e © meakale hintintdkih, ta-nayawagit, " dhealdyth- 
antl Ohi wahkayona, . 

faynod ati-kinttdylw, Ah-ati-kindaldyil, 

"how, ned nila-plro-uhtuhlan, — ndrodin ka-wiydniatdin ;— mdhtet 
natn. dlautal nha-pimakutainin, @ d-wih-utihtinika, d-wih-kakwd-nipah- 
that, 

nidtke hinitiyho, omiatahih ati-nigedhtiw awa wihayia, dhadd ay-whtai- 
pa-wipnodhtdl, dh-pd-ntilat qinimowaisinah, lipinkils dheyoukakindyik, dhe 
pd-pimdudyit, dyihubk dh-haliwahlainamiyit,  liniwih Ay-ihtayil, way- 
oniyrwn, mina dhatih ube pi-aipwdhidygiwa, aythodkida dkawah takuski- 
wdyiwd, mind Kiahodle ay-ihtdyit, “wayiniyuod, Anay nina pll-nimoth- ; 
fdyiwa, tahk ayiwak dy-takunkinodyit, hdydpita waydniyion dkavah, dhutah. - 
dhkwah fa-kakwd-nipahilut, mkt adnay oniatalie nayawagriytion, — inpil > 
Aiarwak dkwuk dh-ayayit, wintatk piawdpink taindkuatyion, 

huntah d-nikiwduiht, “dhwah aviydimay wi-pil-honskavdpaythow 1" 
th-itigihtahh, Ghih unitadwakanah dah hdl-kbhe htukdl dyakuni, “@ dhkam- 
dyimuh 2" tabkih dh-itikut, dlewah Uhpelwankwdpayihnyil kawmipayihin, 
nama wipanth, — tyatih-ini-kmdnkwdpayihigit, Wah ka-hihenipawit, dnay 
Hah k-aptubtdyst, dhatd daay vipawio aoa wakayda! ah-kwdakdpagihut. 
potih kth-nipmwiyina, akan d-mibskiatawal, wiheutihtalath, dh-keawipayihu. 
WH, naniya wiapamniio, kunta mana ktiendkivwdwiht uniladwalann pisindo- 
anin, Ahemiywiyihtamiyit: obi dh-mitawakata, — plyinte wWihonigrahalihtame 
ryfiod, aha wana ayiniyiniwak makohlusiwak, und tdatwak dheaylypit 
pudnod, piyink piyakwanulh ppt aun wakayiin dewih-nipahalahtalte, 
piytik dkwah utinan wipiainah, ndhi nétukdaiwa ka-kih-uipiliiikul dwakune 
d-hibenmdtwakut, dh-lawatnigit www wikayda, d-wif-nipahaldhtakk, dyakuns 
Kha-pinnwat ubinigihh ;  ayink dhatah pikah namaga  piwdpinkiuiytwa, 
wupri th-pnhtubdhayit kdhkihkwah, d-wpuodyaurhiyil, udhiyia dheall- 
lahhunaniyit, hi-waleduvduidt abiladiikandh painidunayia, 

“haw, pintmoudiain, oldh apihtaw-kinihdhl: iat kwahkunin, — dleutd 
‘Bh-prodpinkowil wakuyon wkitindkdyimil,? itudtai~ ayieiyiniw tudtlewnah 
heawith-ukpikit, ha-tdnofiw, "dott, 

"hay, ini-kawipayiha 1" itd, 

(hun ini-kawmlnayih byt, 


lip of tongue; it in Sun-Child whe atanda there: so trandated, 


a 


. ABE 


> 


+ 


Yania tewdw s 1 nivtladwdkanitik, dheéswiya nipahihluk kedatwakatol= 
yah," itdw ; “bahkih thud Wotanidha, neonuya licktheuhypikiw ayintyintw, | 
tldw i" dkund ka-ponthtantiodw ka-mitawdydk," Uw, 

Uhr ld 1" ited uwttadnhand. 

ubiyintimitwdwa da oki mana dohth-antoatutedtk, maka d-onhotwihat, 
k-Gh-lituhameawdal, ldpodhtak, dhwuh kuatih ¢ nemuy doiga dhaah taebihe 
anaindiraferut, deunth pik dh-emantowiyit kanakotnihat, dkunt witinah 
dkwah dh-aydtail bh dylniyiniwak, ‘ 

ktlahtawl dheaipwdhtal, tapatinahh d-nahapll, want-kinkiatw anindyah 
medina dheandakand, ilahtawh ka-anouthat Ahekawayanitdyit ollih, dah bedh~ 
mint, khindpikwah wtmkaodwa, ndhi' ka-kth-mdatithimat ubuotelminiyloa 
natukduirwa, Myckunt dhetoldhut, agian, " dkdya wihkdla muatajtak pth f" 
hahetih.' dhuih dhedta-kakwd-pihkuhat, nama ktlepihheuhtw, — phyink 
witudodhenh aulihtib, sma dhemithukileul, d-uthenipahileul, piylok mdht 
adtinin tah uma kettydl, tahkih detahkindhut la-kakwaenigahat oll wuike 
ww, unin dhemiywdyimiiul oh aytoiyintoa, lakkih inpimihk abatuhe 
dyin) Old pigiile untilwtnihh astwasuyhoa, dhanah ol dkwah uth-kihe 
ktnkwiw, dewthenipahikut, kdkaouy umthkumin ntutum, miyaw. dhol 
dhemanitaht lah, d-wth-habiud-pakunthahh untikwin, plyink pakuntham, 

“haw, noha, ndindkuhike ¢ niwth-nipahite wtnttewdw ( linhwdk plooukta 1? 


‘dd Ohidwiya. 


(dprod Adutwdh aydyion bled carinii plnaniwiwak, undtmn mirth 
dhe-ledniwuluih, — fetlahtaot ka-wayaoliyahtawiytt, (thenipayihteanayite- (tleatnd 
pimatiniw, dkwoh Oma untikatin Onin int vintkunahl, tyvndudto, 


dhuyihuhh Ohtdwiga dkutah hdentpawiylt, “dhahdhd faha il’ dhe 
: | 


tifhut ; "aythk kth-kakdpatiaiw kikdwiy, kd-lthenigoihtahink, dha obyole 
k-th-hakdakiniak, hdepapt-uviutwandtuhlagnikdaiyin, heble-kitkitpaliniyln. 
tahk dytwtikda  ktheatleniatoandtahandhiain, nikeunin — naitenoats — fiw 
kiwdh(ahitin, uncom kikakdpativin, lakh dk papd-totamunth, nama 
la-miywdnin, namauya Akeni nitingndtathldn, " itt, 

dha Huhta dui, duplvihh wtkiyiht aheituhtahihaut, anpin vanunoma the 
wnheimell, . ‘ 

dhuyrhahh Ankh day ohkdwind | 


Ores tpon ti time, when sore people were on tho broly Home women 
left the band, shout sx women, bo dig wild tnips, Among thom was one 
heauiifal wotnaes nono of hor pooplo, hasband, father, or motors wan 
living, She wont along, now, with the obhen, hoy keph on walking 
suid igedng root, 

Thon prosoutly, ino valloy, Ghia handsome woman found many wild 
turalpa, and dog hen up. fn the ond sho aiayed too long, Bho dld not 
notice that she wan left alone, By the time th noticed Ut, tho sun was 
Kolding. Ho, when she wont away from thero, she had no companions, Ho 
she net oul. Sho did not Jaow whither her conpanions had gone, 

‘Thon at one time she Kaw a young ton coming toward hor, Blie sbood 
aul, Tle came to whore the wan . 

“Whit, is the matter?” he asked hor, 

This youth wis handsome, 


mires ramen 


informant adda that HunGhild was burned into the Morning Khar. 


THO 


“Thin thal Ehave lostainy way,” phe bold bins “hab my companions 
hive foft me,” she told bhin. 

“Wy thatsol Th you want ine to tale you home, E will lake you home” 

“You, Gal Cohall not be able to find the way very well,” she sid, 

Vor she did not undoratand bls aardpdit, nnd iioupghh be wees polig bo 
takes ber home to her dwellings buatones th wis te bids people's heme tind 
the youth mennk bo take her, 

Ho he look ber home with bins thoy walked au and on, Ab dnt, at 
Wyhifall, whe it was quite dark, ahe mw a luge lodge. Ouly then did 
phe reign Ghat ih wad nob do ber peoples dwelling Gink she was going. to 
they reached Whe plac, 

When he ontered, the Bio's father, who win old ann, said, Dass 
mel Wait bit, may vont Let medi barn jnesuas,” be sald, ; 

When he had Vit the ineonds, “Wher, now lob iy dadghtordn lew 
Corned paded fis, 


the entered the lodge. ‘There shoe auw bhi while dended wi theald- 


niin whe gat here, iid wesw ary Jomo Hihigs placed wh des frend 


af the lodge, parmenty, and piper, slong php, and alowed berries in tho 
WWI, . ' 

Then, “Dew mol” nid the old iis “Fb in no enny tdng, my Kon, 
that you fave brought me a daughterdilawl! he wdds (Whit aus we plve 
her to ent? Nothing, but berries,” dvs said, 

When he was piven borries to oat, When she baal eaten then, Gey 
went to bed. While whe was adeop, ot her dighand ethecad brow y nln 
_ head the old rane call, “My son, gob ap) Diy iat dud fy nob fort 
thal you take ene of the day!” 


At thin her bonband aro, Che too got up, aid npnin thes old nen 
Look nome berry abew sad juve 1b then bo nad, He book dome black cloth, 
And enough vad fssiel bo made a worms’ leggings and he tore off av 
Jength of colton dott \ 

“There, my non, yen theses Jetny daughbordn daw sew inde weaenneaels 
for herself," he told tin, & f 

Then, when Whey had dong eating, the young man weal out. Chen the 
worn ide a rent for horself, newly nd Any. dunt tan thie sine pet, she 
finished her sewing, od there, ber bush ean Jato the lodge, Oh, the 
wus vlad when be eng in, 

Bonhe nhayed there, and thoy atesonly bores, And truly, hoy husband, 
leaving, ways in the morning, all dig he would not arrive, byb only ab 
nuneel would be come into the lodge, She did not Javow whit fuanner of 
men were her tuba and hoe fathordodiw— the oftan fob vary lonely, 
for the-necver Fw Anyone ole 

Then 66 one tine, at eho eb thore at oighttall, “My von, flo allow my 
daughter indaw to will about during. the day. Surely pies mount feel 
lonely,” etd the ald iin to his Kon. ‘ 

“Very well,” he answered, 


“After all, ue for you mad tag, we ward erented suid ant down by Hu 


vib orders al ings, tint you might tuke eae of the onrth. When d 
found too herd thes bask of caring for tt, Viet tin, who in ell young, de 
the work) 1 thought concerning you, for out Mather, Ghe Creat, Manitou,” 
mid he bo hie gon, 

“Well then, my wife, when Csun not it\bome, you mny walle nbs 
here, Hore too, round about thors sre wild dharniqen,” neil be, 


187 


Shop really she did so; when her hushand had gone away, she too / 
wold wile about, digging wild turnips, When sha brought thm hame / 
jn the -avening, flay pe them, she would put them down Avhere her 
fathorducliaw sit The old man would tale them up and give shanks, 

“Alwayn, you mush kuow, Finve longed for the like of diese, for vary 
Abldom mind given then to eal” he would ay, / 

AL suse, when bear husband enna into the lodge, abt would give him 
food, wad they would eat wild darnips anid berry Abo ,» nothing alse, 

When ab dines, when night bad some, the old man would gay, ‘Now 


my Kon, Linn soni Tneamel” and the door of the young man's lodge wine 
he opened, wud red faanel, and somedimes blade doth, sometimes mistin, 


i 


hagelier with dishes of herry slaw, would ie projected inta his lodge, 


fa 


and the young min wold tales them up, Ff 
Jn (hing the won lovew that she was going fio have a ehild, / 


i 


“Wall tow never Whe about: Iehoud hépe that we may without mis- 
hap hive sight of this child,” her hustinnd fold her, 

Then really she atayed fa one place; ao longer now‘ did that woman 
dig roots; for har husband dad forbidden i, Really, in due time, she felt 
the need of hinving sight of her child, far she grew ill, Deiig ahout to sae 
, dhe and ber hushwid, who was caring 
for hen Thhorned ono bea hoy, Then she was wall, Now, they had, oh, 
mnny clothes) for the woman -did not Iwele whatever she ‘would Uke jn 
env iie for Aid child of hers: for vieh was Ghatold man, ‘The old man was 
very gli to haven gunndehile and even tended the obild himself, so glad 
was hie Lo have a grandson, and the woman only now and then beak eare 
OF the child, walling about, dalsing (he child about, for she was mostly sad 
Wy Ise ta she never saw any Oller people, ho 

Thea at one tine, when ber son had grown larger and was already 
walking ( bik, (hen at ove tine, when her hushand, a8 always, bad ‘gane 
forth enely in the morning, she loo want aut, mounting al random aver 
Mies crente Mf the hill, Mressutly she saw a little lodge, Kha went there, 

When Abe oun to il, “Come in, my grandahild!” said an old wonyan, 
\ ihe uberad, ; : 

“Cpodness ine, turd go here iaany grandmother living here, and C - 
lonesoine mind aod ll the while! she anid to her; “Long ago, if 1 hae 
frnown thik you lware living bere, | should linve been coming to see you, 
foneneoniss nnd Hu as Pave bean all the while,” she said to her, 

” Now tne, gennidohild, and do you know what place this is where you 
wrest! . 

“No” she auswered her, 

“And down there on the earth below, did you laow whe he wus whem 
you have mane?” (he other asked her, 

Na dhs mnnwared her, 

“Phat which you ag aonorial call Aun,! even sueh is he, This is the 
very reason why all of ene day he ja away from bome; because he is 
tude corse of the ourth, shedding in his equa the bright light of day: 
upon thie mortal nen helow, Tis they, your ldnefollt, who ever from time 
Lo dine ave Kolding tuto his lodge sonkdings of harvies, and clothing, gifts 
which your husband aad bis fianily receive,” the other told-her, 

“Alas, grandiaother ming, will you die able to bring me baal! 


hor obild, a the night they saw it 


oD 


one eee 


- ee 
< . 18K . ug _. - 
“Yah, my grandohild, if you find the buffalo-ding whioh Nos by the: 
rove, H you fad tt, aball be able te belng yoru baal Phat la where thin 
icy in plorcad, aud whence your husband always avalos hin way,’ she told 
hor; Vouk for it,” whe told her... 
And no she wont ont and looked for di, Hid not tale hor Jong to 
find it, Shoe wont to see hor grandmother, 

‘“andmother, fo have found i? the old wonma was told by her 
grarldatigly tay, 

“Naw, geandohild, Loan help yeu to edeape, Palca thia, dhe told hor, 
cdving hor hee rawhide (houg, “and te lt, later, to a trea. But firat you 
will mako a nest in whidh you sid your son will at,” sho told her; “And 
thon, lator, whon my rawhide thong bi boo short, i wlll atratoh,” hor grand- 
mothor told hers “Phen when you rene you oar of yours, you will untie 
that te whieh you will he riding.“ ‘Crandinother, here ia your rawhide 
thong! you wilt say, You with fing dh aloft towards this plise, Shen ib 
will come falling here," she told hor. 

Ko he wantnway; first to make the nent, 


"ho Aun by Ghia dine taew Ghat hic wife indendad to Ha, away; alvondy 
ho fol tho grief af ik, But he bad nat yet carploted hia eleault ae dita 
oath, 

Thon whon the wor had meade dhe Chong aud had tlad Ub to a tree, 
nod had lot horoelf dewn by the reps, ever though i proved (oo shorl, Uhe 
rawhide thong euch time slroleahad to new longue, 


By tha tine the Sau had finished hia roundabout course. Ta wont 
to tho place from whidk hin wife had let hersell down. foe took up a nlone, 
"Now then, Thad) ab loant ture the joke oa my wile!” he aaid af har, 
standing clos do that openings “New thea, lot this atone ene down upon 
my wifott head) Lab ime neb by chance injure BaueChild, my sont? ho daidys 
nthe ek gro Lhe abana, cee 

Thoeraupon he wont home aad dato the lodge, 

“My von, have you found whore my daughiter-in-liw has gone?” 

“You Lhave found her tracka, whore she work on her homeward way,” 
he annwored dit, 

“Whyl bwondor if raatly dhe will suscoad in bringing my geandohild 
mvfoly to her hamet hoe wid to him. , 

Vol? 

Whon early morning had come, jut an the woman was about ‘te 
allelt from hee fall, even Gat dhat stone overtook her, 1, same down on 
hor head. Tho rawhide thong broke; she toll upon the bare ground; she 
wan kided by hee fall 


Thore sho-lny. Tho ohild aiayed there, mioking from thine to time at 
hor brown, oven though bin mother had died, Wo did not know that hin 
mothor wan dead, bat kept playing abou Ghat place where hig mater lay. 
Hor a long Gime, in dhe aod, he wae there, fa dime hin mothers body began 
bo docny where ih lay. ; 

Thon at one timo, as he wont about at hia play, ho found the place 
where dwolt a cortain little old woman, and he aw her lide garden, whore 
nA tne way ho rained diferent plants. The ohild did not-know whit 
thoy wore, bub merely would play round where, pulling up the Tidile planta 
and playing with them, not eating thom, but at purposoless play, When 
ho had yone buok to whorg his mothor waa, only than would the old woman 


: Pera! ! 
come to hor garden, and there would be her ‘planta lying round, where the 
ohitd had pluoked tren yp, nd then whé. ould see the teada: of bin, 
© “f winh Feould got aight of thin mig)” rho tought, (nding hin droll, 
Hoang Ghat surely ho mount be w dny fallow, ‘ 

Ko then she fay in walt for him, Prosently tho taht ome raialng, 
Khe thought him very droll, and he tonohed hor heart, An he oume rinnalag 
and reached hor little plants, without horliaten he hogan bo plack chem 
up and ¢hrow that aboot, Hho kopt observing hin, and found hia lovably 
droll, At ast he had cone quite near, walldng cloner, an he kept uprooting 
tho planws, ‘The old woman made a dag for him. By the time he por. 
volved herand tried to eneape, sho had hold of him, an he erfed in for of - 

Le, - a 

“My little grandohild, my title geandohitd{” rho wad Go hin, lelidag 
hin again aed aged; “Whore do you came fram?! nhe akked bit 

"Right now hore,” he told her, J \ " 

“My donr Jitile genndohild, Jam not angry at youfor having xpolled , 
there plants of mine. Tam boo glad Thave found you,” sho Gold fila, 

Thon, when sho ret bln down, off he san Then she followed bho, . 
There she dw someone lying, ‘Vo that place the ehild went, 

“What person in thi, my grunclohihe?" sho nated Aims “tn thia the 
one of whom you npeuk mi your mother’? : yes 

“Vout Chere ik tot meyone elias there are fad we two, tay mothor 
nud O" be told her, 

CA Yat, my doar Title prandehild, Enea that, youre laa woolul plight,. 
ny geundohild? “fb shall take you home with me. fb ahiall keep you ana 
own, Your mother hare innot alive he hi died. You will adrely porlgh 
here, in dhe end, if you do not leave her. Never nine thin orth began tas 
Th bean no, has li been portible foe one nat living to bo atayed by," ahe told 
hinds “bP ahall take you home with mo’? she lull him, 

Yon f? so . 

Roally whe dook har grandchild home with hers She brought bla to 
hor dwolling, Oh, she olf sorry for dims she pided hin aid gave tin 
food, ‘The Title boy tiked boing with the old woman, And no he conned 
thinking of hin meothior, 7 
Thon, prevontty, ai he and bls geendimodher wore living there, “Grands 
son, bam in the habit of ways walkiag about here, Do you navar go off 
anywhere, Always thay and take care of the houta, aud fram time to time 
ro boomy pgrrdon,” she bold hor gxnndian, 

And really, when day cate, “CGrandnon, Cam going to walle about,” 
the told him, Lo Jook for thingn to oat,” she old him, “and to go, ws ldo 
from time to time, do where vome young mon five, not very far from hore,” 
phe told him, , , 

Ho the would always go awny, and he would play thoro, going xoma- 
tines do her garden, and whon ho wont there, pulliay up dus grandmother's 


planta, 


In the evoning, when the old woman camo, “Grande, aid your ga 
to my pardon?” nnd whon ho anid “Vou. sho would go there, and there hor 
plants would be lying xeattored about, where he had pulled them up. 
“Truly my little grandson is naughty! tho old woman would nny, 
and she would laugh, as sho picked thom up and carriod them home, When 


MUCHO td 


100 


she came into the ledge, sho would piek hin up aud kins hoe again and 
again, saying, “OMy doar Hite grandson, nay done (idle grandson? 

hen atone time he begin to ak hia grandmother quentlons, ywhon 
he had grown larger, ‘ 

“Crandmothor, what sort of things are those? he asked her, of some 
things that were enclosed in two separate bladdomt that were tied to the 
lodge-poles, 

‘Why, grandson, never mind what they are,” sho anawered hin, 

She would tot toll him what things were in thervo, But San-Child 
knew Chat those bladders wore always twitohing and moving, And so, 
an they lived there, once when his grandmothor had gone off in hor usual 
way, he flehed her little sinew strings and made yomo snared, Whon ho 
had made them, wherever thoir little dwolling war broken, hoe aot a mao, 
and at the top he lowed up the smoke-hole of thal lodge, ‘Then, whon he 
had out opan one of those bladders, there, it was full of blackbleda, Soo, 
thene it wan wore in thare, Te whooped and yelled, and chased them, and 
try an they might to fy out of the house, he snared thom all, Ue killed 
thom all, laughing loud and anuaing himself with them.” Whou he thought 
his grandmother wad about to arrive, he piled thom up in one place and 
throw xomothing ovor thom, aad ashe put thom undor the covering)2 Now 

-Wwe shall eat them,” he add; “Now wo shall eat thom, my granding doy ; 
“and 1,” he sald, cca ae 

Whon she arrived, in the evening, and gama into the lodge, he dald too °° 
her, “Grindmother, wow we shall ent” ’ ¥ 

“What will thin doar tittle grandohild of mine be glyiig mo aca brea??? 
dhe asked him, ; ; 

‘Just uncover this hore, grandmothorn” , 

When sho uncovered it, what did sho Hoo but the blackbirdst, 

“Tin grandmother wept, saying, “Truly, my grandion han dono mo 
grief!” and tolling him, “Traly, my grandson is naughty!” 

Whon at last aho conmod her lamentation, she picked them up and. 
plucked thom. When she had got them loan, sho sot them to eook, 

When sho had cooked thom done, “Grandson, do you alone ont,” 
she told Ain, ° 

Accordingly, ho alone partook of the meal. Whew ho had hin fill, he 

-qnit eating thom, She put theni away, 

“You will ont rome more of thom later,” she told him, 

So, at they continued to live thera, and hia grandmothor wont off 
evory day, when he had oaton all of those blaalbirdes, agnin ho sot snares, 
Again he closed up their lodge nt the lop, and again ho out open a bladdor - 
and the plice was filled with tho twitloring of swallows, as ho whoopod ane 
Vollod and gave thom ehnso, “An many of them as tried to oxeape fram tho, 
roune, ho mnarod, flo killod them all, thin time too. Again ho pilod thon 
Up in ono place and covered thom up. Thon his grandmothor amo hone. 

Ilo said to hor, (CGrandmothar, no mop, hoe told hor. 

“ tent in—thie arandvon of inine about to give mo?” the old 
womnn axkod hin, 
‘ “Uneover (his hero,” he said to his grandmothor. 

When sho uncovered it, at once sho began to woop, . 

“Oh, graidmothar, be quiet! You are always wooping for no reason 
alall?' ho said to hor, Be 


. {QI ; 

Wher tho conned orying, sho sald do hdin, “Crandon, suroly you iro 
vory niuplity, Th war boone you wore dn minorable state tia f took 
pity on you and befelonded you, and bore you are doing away with all my 
ohildront ‘There are iy ohildvon, peandion. ta thecond fomay be lod to 
do you tome barn. You have angered ate, oven though 2 fall pity lig, 
Kindnom for yor when you dl ae harm nid pvoatly tal: warke my gaudou 
“plantas Eloved wind chorluhod theta ny poor children whom you hive nll 


dontroyod. He eff) go awayl Todo not want to. being vai bo ruin, poor 
: . 
~ 


eremiie that you are,” tho sald to bhi, ; ; 

Acoardlagly, he arate, wank ont of Gho lodge, and dopirtod, Ue wont 
off In tome direction, ho know uot whither, Whergvor hare tb calpelatfeall, 
ho day down, aot choosing where, Whon day broke, he wanton. At toon 
ho aw a tplii place whore there wero many moll cavinow Vhithor he 
wont, Ho naw Ghieb tho dpb was coverod with painted symbola, 

When ho roaehod tt, “Oho, eome in, some In, NaeChildl! a youre tamu 
eallod out to lia, 

Whon be entered, what did he doe but somo youth nittlage round the 
nidon of tho lodgo, splondidly deouiod, but woarkig only helped relia! 

© When COvor hovel” thoy said to him, he did not head thetelivitation, 

Thin will do, right herel? ho auawoeod them, soabloge blame! by the 
dooreflap, a ; : 

Then soon, “Dene me, wo are dndecontly sow about servings food to 
Bun-Childl And just now we thought it so glad ain event that he enna bo 
nl" nadd one, ; : so 

*Qoodnors, hut what oan we give tles bo enh?! ~ 

“Why, quidldy roan bulfalositomadh to be served woll done and 
piping hott Qulokly roant Ih done,” ; 

No one put an the ron. Very noon be took ib frot the fire, 

“Dorr me, suroly Tt cannot be done?” avid anothers “You had better 
bite off a plese to tryt Surely you will find dt oan't be cooked done!” 

Te too Dit off u plooe, . 

“Et dn not done,” nad thing one too; hunt seo for yournalf!”! 

He gave It to another, and oaoh loolo nw bite next to whore the other 
had bitten, When they got through, thene youth had bliten off mornets 
all round the edge of (hoe gisanrd, 

By thin time youder old woman had net out to come hore, the old 
women from whom SuneChild bad parted when ho eume, foro know duet 
Bun-Child had roaehod hor sona whode. for there ten youthy were thit 
old wor’ sou, : ' 

At Tost all thone youth had talon hibor, 

“Th ta cooked done,” thay aud, ; : 

“Ho, no now let him owt! they naid of KuneChild, 

He tool his knife and eat all eeound the edge of the shomach) When 

Hho, tittdenly he throw the trinining into the fire, 
At oneo ho fled out of the Jodgo, at they enied, “Stun-Child da tating da all? 
Indeod, he had killed them ull. or they wore rattlonucen, Ho iid dong 
nway with thom all. And so he fled, 

And now youdor old woman came in puri, chasing SumChild, 

“Now you have really angered mo, StaChild, doing mo so many 
griefs and now destroying all my none!” . : 

AML Hm Lit 


tp 


192 ; 
. fo now he was chased by the old woman, and fled he knew not where. 
In tine, whon sho was close upon him, he became frightened, 

He cried, “Pather, comp near in your course! Tho Old Rattlesnake 
Woman means to killane!” fxgaid to him. ‘ 

Truly, low in his goytso came his father, the Sun, It grew very hot, 
until at leat the old Wwortim felt herself about ta be roasted. She gave up, 

“And 40 you hive.sayed your life, Sun-Child! T give you up,” sho satd 
to him; “But owing ty this, do not, do never seat yourself on the bare 
ground!” said-the'old4goman to Sun-Child. 

Accordingly, his father went higher in his course. The old woman 
went home, And Sun-CRild, as ho walked on, found a stone of flat shape, 
He took it up, and wherever ho meant: to sit-down, there he placed it, 
using that stone as a seat, He did this every timo, putting the stone under 
him also when he went to. sleep,and in the morning, when he went on, 
taking the stone with him. we 

Then at one time, as he. wandered about, he came upon a town. Te 
reached: it. He stood_on.a rise in the land and looked at the tents. 

“Oho, Bun-Child’ has arrived!” was said in his hearing. 

Soon ono came to him, to invite him in, 

“To, Sun-Child, you are to come!” 

“Oh, very well,” 

He went along with him. 

As he entered the lodge, “Oh, come in!” he was told. . 

’ When he sat down, “There, quickly give him food! Surely he must 
he hungry!’ was said of him. : ° 
. “Why, gracious heavens,it_is Sun-Child! Truly it is no light thing 
that you have come heresWhere unceasing are the contests, the contests of 
spirit-unimals, And indeed, it is we who are always defeated. Dy this 
time doubtless he hag already decided to challenge you, the Iron Bull. 


‘Most dangerous is he; never have we defeated him. And go, no matter 


how unwilling we sre to contend, he is determined to. destroy us com- 
pletely,”’ the other explained. 
hi “L do not happen to be going about in search of contests,” he told 
im, _ 

‘Doubtless they will challenge you none the less. They challenge at 
once any new arrival,” ‘he was told; “But it is evening now. Tomorrow 


3 _ probably they will challenge you,” he was-told. 


_ Then he was given food. At last darkness fell. Then, thenext morn- 
ing, when ‘they had eaten, already he heard the announcing call, 

“Hear ye, hear ye, hear ye! Make ready! Come to look on! There 
will be a contest! Last night arrived Sun-Child, who, it is said, is going 
about, seeking contests; he is to contend with the Iron Bear! Come 
orth! “ . . 

Already the other had come. , 

" “Come, Sun-Child, you aro to come forth, as the Iron Bear is to 
challenge you.” : w , 

Then, ‘At any rate, go forth, In any case, even if you pay no heed, 
none the less he will seck to destroy you,” he was told by him into whose 
lodge he had come, whee now he stayed. . 

“Very well. It is not true that I am going about seeking contests,” 
he said; “But never mind,” he said. 


eee 
Hi 


193 , 


Accordingly, be made ready., Already, where thore was a stretch of 
fJevel Jand, thither the other had gone. . > 

“Ifo, quickly, come forth!’ he was told. . 

Accordingly, he went out and proceeded to the place. They wore 
already standing about in a circle. . not a8 

When he arrived, “Now then, Sun-Child, you are going shout ongaging 
in contests, it is said concerning you. You shall have the first: Shot.” 

“No! You first! Seeing it is not of my own will Law ontending.” 

“Very well,” suid that bear. 2 OM ‘ 

Already he thought as follows: “Now,.O my father, watch me from 
closa by!” he avid, thinking this: “Perhaps, if the weather is hot, he will 
tire,” thinking this of the bear. . 

Really, it grew hotter and. hotter, as the bright glow of the sun in- 
creased, ee: : . 

“Now then, from yon place T'shall.come. Four times J shall start for 
you; and on the fourth time J shall spring,” meaning that he would seize 
him, that he would try to kill him. 

But it was very hot. The bear went oft a long ways, starting from ao 
good distance to-come Fanning at Sun-Child. Just as if the ground were 
soft swamp, when he cime, he sank deep into it. When he was near, he 
turned back. , Again he wourted from the sume place. Thiy time he sank 
eyen farther, into the ground, Again, when he had come near, he turned—— 
back. - Again he. started hither, always sinking deeper into the earth. 
Now, he turned back once more, and now was when he would try to kill 
him. But by this time he was very tired. When he was near, he looked as 
though all of iron. _ 

Those on his side were yelling wildly. “Now surely he will come 
leaping!” he thought. His comrade at whose house he was staying’ kept 
telling him to take heart. And then, os the other came Icaping, he flung 
himself down on the ground. The other did not see him. In vain the other 
tricd to hurl himself to the spot whence he had stood; already he stood there 
whence the other had come, throwing himself from place to place. Then | 

-he saw the other stand still; At once he attacked him, When the other, 
ag soon as he was upon him, flung himself down, he could not see him; 
wildly all this time his companions were whooping for Sun-Child, happy 
that-he-was-giving thatothers fight. At last the other was helpless from 
want of breath. Those men, too, were oppressed by the heat, for the 
Sun was too near. At last he stood still in one place, that bear, almost 
dead from want of breath. So then he took his arrows, which that little 
old woman who had raised him had made for him. Where that bear stood: 
with open mouth, helplessly panting, he shot him in the mouth; for only 
there was the other not of iron. In flew a hawk, flying elear through the 4. 
creature's body, seizing his heart, while Sun-Child’s companions cheered, 

im. . 
“Very well, Sun-Child, throw me into the direction of noon. There, 
when mortal man, who in time is to grow forth, says, ‘The Iron Bear has 
taken pity-on me,’ he will speak true,”-said he. 

“Ho, throw yourself to the ground facing so!” he told him. 

So the other threw himself‘to the ground, facing that way. 

Thus he spoke: “My comrades, do not kill those who have been given 
as stakes by your opponents,” he told them; “If you always do thus, 


Jon , 


; . 

mortal man will not be able te grow forth’ he told then; “fn this wine 

you are Lo cons from your contests,” he told then. 
OPrily, that is chil? anid his companions. 

. or in fret these people wore accustomed to sake thei followers; bat 
now that he had overcome them and prohibited it, they oboyed him. Vor 
they feared hin: there was no one now who would challenge him, since hé 
jal defented the one among them who had most spirit: power. 
these people lived in pence, 

Then at one time, 18 he went forth and sat down on a hilltop, he forgot 
Lo follow his custom of using tho stone as a deat. Presently, he felt) some- 
thing crawl in here, . 60. 0... a orettlesnakes it was ¥pn old Wornan 
whore children bho had wiped out, was doing this to him. for, “Never sit 
on the bare ground!” she had told him. Then, try as he might to pot tho 
creature out, he could not get it out. At last his comrade 
he was, As thas he was tormented by that creature whith was tryling to 
kil him, at last many came to where ho was, urging himfto try to kill that 
rattlesnike, for dearly those people loved him, The cfeature kopt] going 
higher aod higher: at last it got into his head here. Ang when it was here, 
he began to be delirious, as it was killing him, Wo asl6d for something to 
use in the way of a knife. It was given to him. Theft ho cut a piecolaway 
from here, trying to make ajhole in his head, and ut last succecded. 
“Here, father, the rattlesnake in tormenting ine and means to kill me! 
Come near to me!” he said to his father. 
teally, the Jatter came near. Those people went down from thet hill- 
top, because they were too hot. Presently it came climbing out, forced to 
extremity by the heat. So his life was saved. Then}'when he rubbed his 
head like this, it healed. ; 
Then, there stood his father, saying to him, “Alas and alas! No won- 
der, sceing how foolish was your mother who took you away with her,\yo 
that there was no one to instruct you, no wonder that you went about 
making # ruin of things at large, and that you are a fool. You will coh- 
tinue to make a greater and greater mess of things, my son. It will 
better if I take you home with me. You are too much of a fool., If yor 


¢ 


continue to go about as you have, no good will come of it. I do not wish 


such things to be,’’ his father told him. 


So they went home, his father taking him aloft to where he dwelt; and 


from that time on he stayed with his grandfather. 
That is the end of the sacred story. 


(22) He Who Carried the Old Woman 


Sakewew 
stikdwiw, 


Kitahtawd nistiwak ayisiyiniwak, nisu ndpdwak. -aht népdwa usimiw 


~ aw iskwaw. ékwah pdyak namuy Gtuskdw usimimdw. misaskwat utinam ; 
aya, d-saskahuhtat uhtsi. dkwah ustdsa mateiyiwa, mitsiwin dh-totamakut- 
st 


Kitahtawd awa napdw ustdsimaw, mistah dh-aydtsik milsiin, “ hd, 


nisim, mahtih nka-ntunawdw awiyak kit-Gwistawiyahk, kimisinaw kit- 
i 


came to|wharo 


\ 
‘ 
t 
1 


Fy 


rs 


10% 

Gnitpdmit, dwaku wotattaoiyahlen, namuya hike-nitpidvwisinanaw, nipdw 
dlah aydtal ' 

“ aha’, " itih, 

hitrahtenwd aipwdhide, dh-pa-rialidl. piyakwaw d-kih-nindt, wapah- 
tam miktedhy,  dgnhla- Wtanthea hele itekyistawdaldyiw, ahust polh kd-wap~ 
amd hahkdkiwa dh-ukdhkwdaktoahihaniyita polih dheutihtahh, kd-kttowiytt 
Ohi h-dheutwiniyit milecudh pill, eae 

“ tawiiw 1" itik, Be ‘ ; 

htuleda, ithepltyaknyioa napiwa, polih dh-ktsi-mitateut, ndpdwe 
kd-takiuiniyit, kutakah uskintkiwa, 

dkwah mia ttwdwu : “ kdkway dh-papd-nataman, ka-papamuhtdyin 9” 


itil, 

“a,” thodw, © Ginis ah-tayihtaman k-6-papdmuhtdyan : ‘mahtth nik- 
stata, dheatdyihtaman ; ‘nka-miydw nimisah,’ dhtidyimitdn, d- 
nayihtawryan, aka wih keds dhepikinlewal nimis," k-Gh-pd-miyitdn. ” 


“dyad , ” tik ; “ntya wrya mindkewdyimun 5 uiya maka nahd nisim 
mask ote la-tdpdyimow, ” dttk, 

“hd, usm nam dakwa nnihtdh-nipahtan kdkway, ta-kih-wiwiyain 
wiwis miya ; ahpoh kiya kdkway kinthid-nipahtan, aka tydndyimuyin.” 

; “ahahdy 1” itwdw aw ustdsimaw ; “plah kistwak wiktwak nisimak 
d-nisttstk 4 pdyak nistis, dh-ndwitsik dwakunik, nistu usima éh-pamihikut, 
usdin nihtdh-nipahldwak kdlkeway dyakunik,” ink; “ dhusi dkutdé kik- 
dtuhtan,”' ttik ; “ dyakuntk ka-ntawipamadwak. mdskits pdyak kita- 
tdpdyimotw,”? tik. 

ituhidw. potih d-sdkdwat om aspatinty, wdpahtam mikiwahp. patih 
kahkwaskwahikanah wadpamdw, Ghowa, dsay kd-kituyit, ituhtdw. 

mayaw dy-ulihtahk,  tawdw, wiskinikiyan 17’ rtéw, 

dkuat ituhtdw. pthtukdw. asamdw,  d-kisi-mitsisut, ist dskinikiwa 
pihtukdyiwa, pihtatwdnah ah-akutdyiwa. 

“haw, linisi dtiskdyan, Oma kd-pdh-ituhtdyin dtah?” itwdw aw 
usldstmadw, 

omnis itdw: “ah, nimis ih-pi-miyitakuk pdyak.” 

Sniya wiya tipiyahk dh-asamitsik nistmuk, nama kikway nnihta- 
nipdhtan. namuya ta-ki-wiisdwok iskwdw,” itwdw; dkwah, “ haw, nisi- 
mittk, nikutwdw pdyak ituhidk kiyawdw |” 

- ik: * hah, iyika ma tsdskwah kdkway nihtéh-nipahtaydhk ! namuya 

_ niya nka-kd-ituhtan, ” itwiwak kahkiyaw. 

~ “ahdy, waskintkiyan | 6ma k-Gsdhisak awasdyihk dkutah wikiw naohia- 
wiy. mdwatsth wdwustdsimdwiyit ukusisah niwu wikimdw, aka isdskwah 

_ dh-wiwitstk dwakunik nisimindnak, dkwah nisu uskinikiskwiéwak nisim- 
indnak,” tldw; “dhuld ituhld. méskdts nohtdwiy wih-miyikuydikuh 
ulawdsimisah nistu, nisw iskwdwa dkwah pdyak napdw, wih-miyisk nohta- 
wiy, ' itdw. . 

dkust tipwd wayawiw. tydyaw dkuld ttuhtdw ké-kiskinéhamaht itch. 
dkwah dy-ate-sdkdwdl, potth tdpwd mikiwahp wapahtam apihta-kisikahk 


10n account of the brother-and-sister tabu; the sister's husband would make com: 
munication possible. 

? Kinglish-speaking informants could not tell what Valens: was. Literally; 
it ig “thing for tightening (7) sticks.’ 

*On account of the brother-and-sister tabu.. 


“He means d-nistitsik, and I have so ee tod. Informant is 5 given to slips of tha ........ 


tongue 88 regards numbers and opposites. 
( 


N 


ae 106 
dh-itishwaslawdstdytk. dkwah mayaw d-wipahtahk, wépamik kdhkwask- 
wakikanah, kihiwa. sdmdle kitéw awa kihiw, takuhldw mikiwehpihk. 

" haw, tawdie 1” thaw, 1, cs 

pihtukiw, dwin shi, kisdyiniwa, notukdsiwa,’ namwdls awiya wip- 
amdw, ndydstaw ttah dheuhtapiyit wnatowahk, uma nohtapiwin dkutdwahk 
aythtahk, “ haw, taivdw 1" k-dtiht. 

d-kth-pthtukdt, Thaw, nétukdaiw, asam | ta-milsiséw 1" ttdw. 

ha, kétahktawd asamndw.  d-hist-mitstsul, kd-pd-talwdwilamiyil, pd-pd- 
pikiskudytt ikwdwa, ptyd-pthlukdyit, awin Ghi, uskintkiskwdwa.  d-hisi- 
nohapitsik, kutakak mina piyd-pihtukdtsik ndwu napdwak, 

dkwah mis itik: “ haw, wiskinikiyan, tdnisiw éma k-bh-pd-ay-ituh~ 
tdyan ? ttudw awa Kisdyiniw ; “ dtah tsiw bki ntawdsimisak kikth-pd-Gh- 
ulihtawak 77" —-- 

“éha’ ," tlw. ' = 

“ kdkway maka kd-uhist-papamuhldyan ?” ; 

"d, éyokunik kitawdsimisak, ‘ maht dkutah ttuhtd,’ dh-isitatk. d-nay- 
Ghtawtyahk nimisindn, pikuh d-witsdwayahk, dka wihkdts dh~pikiskwit 
nimis, dkwah pdyak nisim uskinikiw, anuhts dw-uhtsi-witsdwaydhk. ' mds~ 
kéts pdyak kik-duistdwin dkuta; nédhidwty ta-sihkimdw tawdasimiaah,’ 
dhitwdt awa kikusts, kd-kih-pd-utihtitakuk, ” 

“haw, wdskinikiyan, ékt ntawdsimisak iskwdwak nam dskwa nihtd- 
wikwasiwak, ta-kih-undpdmuitsik, makwdts kaskikwaésdwin dh-nilsihtatsik. 
hdw, dkus ist nama kikd-migtin,” itik haw, kiyawaw, ntawasimisitik, 
payak kit-dtuhtéw, ” wd dindwa néwu. 

pikw dnah, ted | ma tséskwa d-ndhtd-wiwiydn niya mina |” 
ik kahkiyaw Ohi népdwa. . ; ; 

‘“hé & ay, wdskinikiyin ! ayis nama tdpwahtamwak tawdsimisak. 
nisawats Glaw uhisi kiwdh. aw, akah tapwihtamani, tépiydhk dtdh isi aka 
wiya ituhtah, "' itik, ; 

dkus ist wayawiw. dma itéh kd-kitahamaht, dkutd ituhidw. potih 

_ Gh-ali-pa-pmuhtat dh-usdhtsdyik, d-sakdwit,’ patih- ka-wépahtahk wistd- 
pakkwaytkamik. ituhtdw. iskwahtimihbah-ahtal, ispimahkiapiw apasohk : 
poh apisis kd-pimdpahtayik, dkuit mwdhtst é-wth-pihtukal, dh-paspapte, 
awin 6hi, mituni ndtukdsiwah. dmisi Kih-totamiyiwa, dh-noéhtd dh-nipah- 
Gyil ulihkumiyiwa. uhlsitwanthk ayiwakds méhkitapiw awa nétukdsiw. 
dkust asihidw aw oskinikiw. éh-iy-asihtal, nahikuhtakandmow, “ khhr 1” 
Ghalwét, “ awa: ndtukgsiw dmisi kita-tétam ; uskutakay ta-yasdkinam, ” 
th-tdyihtahk aw dskinikiw. ag udkas iskunamiyiwa uskutakayiwa. 

uéw. 


“tawaw mndka, nésisd 1” dé 
ee 


on 


d, misawdts nélukiwiw. ta-ydsikinam uskutékay,” itiéyihtam. 
pihtukéw. kwaskipayihdw awa notukdsiw, 

“ kékway é-papd-ndtaman 9” itd... 

“ th, népiw d-papé-ntunawak, kit-Gwistéwiyan, ” dik, . 

‘ aa dst kikt-wapamawak aw tah ka-wikit nimandtsimdkan ?”’ iteh. 

“ kitaydwaw tsi iskwiw ?” 

“ namuya. ” 

“ Gta tsi kki-wapaméwak ntahkusak J” 

ir¢ dha’ . ” 

“dwakunk -anikt d-kiskindhamawakik kaskikwasowin. nihtawik- 
wasulwawr, iyekuhk kit-Gndpdmitsik,” itdw ; “niya ndtsihkawin,” itwaw 
awa nélukdsiw. s 


4 


‘ 


1oF 


"ah, undm kindtukdwin, nohkeo,’”? dtdw, 
“hay | dkwiyak ant aylatyiniw pikwiett | kahkiyow anikt kd-pdw- 
utthtatathk, nndpdmak aniki, dkd kd-tapwihtaman: ta-wilamiyan i" 
“hd, n6hkG, usdm kindtukdwin 1” | 
dkust allepastkéw,; dkus dheitdt, kwdskwdpayihow awa nélukdsiw, 
Gtah dhtindl, dkwah uskdtah d-wdwakipayihtat, dtah dkwah dh-akwaskitindl. 
dkwah notukdstw wiw-utihtinikdw, dh-dla-pahkwatindt, nama kaskihiw, 
usdim d-maskawisiylt Ghkuma. papdmowatdw, nina awa nitukdaiw nipiy 
dh-wapinahk, dhestkitdl, ndpdwisiw aw uskinikiw. dkwah kunta papd- 
muhidw. ituhidw kisdyiniwa wikiyihk, iah dh-kdh-pawdmit aw uskinikiw. 
mitunt kisdylniwiw. dy-ati-lakuhtde, kd-pd-wayawiyit. 
“ dyaha | tanisth k-oh-pdtowatdm ikhawiyin, notukdsiw?” itik. 
“ndh, d-pakwdatt awa, ‘nétsihkawin,’ dh-atiy-ttuk, dh-pakwasit, 
‘ntaawdls nka-naydmik, ’ k-dh-itityinhale. niki ktkusdkak, dwakunik d- 
moh-miyusiteik, nam dwiyak npakwitik, dkdya ndnituw isin.  nikisi- 
waytk awa, dh-pakwasil.” ; 
' “hdy d& dy; wdakinikiyan ! lah sdkahikaniwiw. ‘dkuld maht Tt 
dkutah anith aydwak nisu nostsimindnak, d-katin akayomat awa kd-naydmat. 
niy dni wiya nikustdw niwikimdkan, ” ‘uibyiba, 
sipwdhtéwaldw. tdpwih utihtam sdkahikan, kuntah ha-pah-pahpiyit 
uskinikiskiodwa nisu. 
“hay, tadnisth maka mina k-ch-awdststhkdsuyin, kd-pd-naydmikaw- 
iyin ?” 
“hah, ékhadya ndntaw twa, nbsisimitik | d-~pakwasit awa, d-kisiwahit, 
‘ nisawdls nika-papa-nayomak, ’ ‘k-dtdyimak. ” 
tiuh népétsih, tdprskdytki, kdydpits naydmiw ; kikéwatdsin. dkusi 
nama ndntuw itwiwak ok éskinikiskwawak. ; ; 
“ nisawGts mahtih npawémowinihk nk-dtuhiahéw, ” itdythtam, 
dkwah papéy-~itowaldw. 
tékuhtéts: upawdkanah, ‘ dhahdy, nosyst, nikustaw {7 itaw, 
nama nantaw kih-tétamawa ta-pahkwatinimiht. dkust myts kahkiyaw 
upawaméwinihk nama kékway. dkwah aydaw. 
“mkw dkwah ta-nipahit, ta-nipahdhkatusuydn, " itdyihtam. 
kdtahtawd ay-dtataw takusin itah dtubtdtsi. piyisk ulisindkwaniyrw 
ttah kah-nipdtsi, d-na-naydmét nétukdwa, kitahtawdé wdapahtam sipisia, 
dw-ulakusiniyik, amiskwa d-kih-kipahamiytt. dkutah ituhtéw. nétd aka- 
mihk wapahtam ahkapaskwah' dh-ayaythth ; ; aspis misttkwah dh-uydsk- 
wantyikth aydyiwa, . 
“hd, dkutd akdmihk nka-ntawi-pimisinin. kiyém ékutd nka-nipin,” 
itéyihtam: 
‘path dataw piisitisin? : . 
“ ntsawats nka~pimitdtsimun. Ghtsitaw dma niwih-nipahik awa notuk- 
dsiw,”) idythtam. 
Kitahtawé ati-sipwiohtaw. nahisin sisund kipahikanihk. dsay tipiska- 
yiw. ali-pimildtsimow. hdkdts dh-kapdt, néhtdésin. 
“ ah, wapahkih mik-otihtan, ” ttdythtam. 


tA wvater-weed, not identified. I do not understand this passage. 
/ *Yf the record is Tight, the word is analyaable as initial stem pitstl- ;/ “draw toward 
one”; connective --; animate final -sin : “come down, lie’; one would/expect ts for the 
t. Meaning? 


198 


Kitahtawd = kd-wipamdl ayisiyiniwa ;  moydpitasdkuyiwa ; — namahl- 
myiwa's pakamdkan dh-pih-tahkunamiyit, kuntah ka-ted-teipipayit ohi 
hd-nayomal. : 

“nlaawdts dstam, ntalah (" itwaw awa kd-naydmat notukdsiwa. 

dkust pdy-ttuhldw. kiskdyihtam dh-kustdyit dyakunth. 

“vah, tanisi Oma, nistah, k-dh-naydmat awa nolukdsiw ?” 

“ gwa, nista | mahtih kakwd-pthkuh 1” 

“@, nista t piku maka kita-pakamahwak, dké wi-pakitiniski 1” 

“ hay, nosisd, kitimakdyimin | kiydm nika-pimdtisin | kiyapits pay- 
akwiw uih-mdlawdw, kisttw.  keit-Gpatsihtat nka-miyaw. dhust kit-oh- 
sdkalethtwat kd-wih-miyak. kiyam nka-pimdlisin, nosied |” itdw. 

tapwih, “ aya’ 1 dkd wiya kakwd-tsisi nistdw. kispin kakwd-tsisihatst, 
misawgts nka-pdhidn. hdw, pakitin 1” aoe 

pakitintk, . 

dkust, “ hd, nistah { haw, éma mitsth 1” itik wistawa. 

minis piyak mitsiw; kéwih wiyindw ; maskawisiw kdwih. dkwah 
miyik nisu sdpunikanah, dkwah nisu uskdtsihkwah, dkwah asiniyah dh- 
apistsisiyit ; nisty. 

“dw, nésisd, dydpits pdyakwaw kika-mdtawan !" itéw awa notuk- 


dsiw kd-kih-nayomikut. yo 


hG i” 


dkust Kiwdw awa nétukdsiw. dkwah awa kd-namahtsit niawi-wiwiw' 


umisiyiwa Ght ka-ulihtdt. 

dkusi sipwéhtéw, dh-wapaniyik. d-tahtakwahtsdyik, d-paskwdéyik dh- 
at-Gtihtahk, kitahtawd d-mdkwé~pimuhtdt, kd-pd-sdkdwdyit iskwdwa nisu. 

“ hay, nitimusd, dkutah nipawih ! awiyak dsiskamdtsi, dwaku kika- 
wiwin ; awiyak nakatihisi, kisima kit-undpdmiw,”’ itaw. . 

nipawiw. dkwah nakt uskintkiskwdwek pd-wiyatedwiwak. dkusi nam 
dwiyak nakaldw. 

“ hdy, dkwah nikinahk ituhtdtan /” ttdw. 

dkwah ituhtdwak. pot dma mékiwahp wistépahkwayikamik, ‘utihtam- 
wak. pihtatwinah nayomaw aw uskinikiw. d-takuhtatstk dtah wistapahk- 
wayikamikuhk, pihtukdwak 6k iskwéwak dh-mdh-miyusitsik. dh-pihtukdt- 


sik, Gtéh isi, minamahtinthk iskwahtémihk kih-apiyiwa uskintkiskwésisah, 


ulakikumiyiwa d-sdkamuyit, dkwah d-pikiwaskdpiyit, kuntah misiwd uhk- 
wakanthk thkwah ké-papdémahtawiyit aw iskwdsis, wdwis ustikwanihk, 
misiwd wiyawihk, uskdtihk, usitthk misiwd dh-aydyit thkwah. wdpamdw. 
uldw. . Pe, 
“hd, é-papé-ntunawak nisw iskwdéwak, nisim pdyak kita-wiwit, dkwah 
payak niya. dsay wiya niki-miskawaw kit-Owistdwiydhk. ” 

“hah t kiy dtsik Ghi k-dtsimikawiyin, ‘ papéh-ntunawdw kita~wiwit,’ 
k-atikawiyan |” itik Gh dskinikiskwdwah, tahkih dh-pahptytt. 

“dha, niya 1” ; 

“néhah wiwih,” itwiwak, 6hi k-6tihkumiytt. 


kitépaméw. . 

it a tihk Py . sh oosapin. 7! dhant 

‘ isdn ubhkumiw. namuya nika-kth-wiwin, ” itwiw awa. 
4 ahi” ' 


tapwah undépémiwak ; wa-wikimdwak. 
kitahtawaéh kunita kah-papdmitdtsimut awa k-6tihkumit. 


1 Perhaps, “He was left-handed”; the meaning in the text ig common. 


dkwah a-kih-mitsisut aw uskinikiw, “kékwayz6ma d-papd-ndtaman?” 


109 


“hah 1" 

kuspiwdpindwak, 

“ ldnisi maka mina ds-dyinihkdyib? ” itwiw awa k-btihkumit ; “ hay, 
nlawdsimisitik, iskah dh-atuskdyan, éhuyikuhk iskah ka- dni-kinkwwihke 
wasityan, dh-usthimak nnahdhkim kit-étakuhmt. mistahi nnbhdh-aluskan, " 
itwdw aw iskwisis k-biihkumit. . 
dhust kikedpad mdtsiw ; ukwaskwipayihosa pdyak nipahdw. pdsiwdw 
misiwd, i 

“hd, dkwah, ntawdsimisitik, pahkwikisuhk 1" itdw. 
pahkwakiswéwak, 

“ ntawdsimisitil, ntawi-nitumihk nim 1” itwdw awa k-otihkumit. 
ldpwd niawi-ntumdw uldma awa k-olihkumit. pot bhi alimwa mintwd 

dh-piwapiskowiyit. we . 

“nidm, ntawi-mitsisuh, nnahdhkim dh-nipahtwask kita-mitsiyan, ” 
mowdw atim awa kwaskwdpaythowisa. dsay mistkiliw aw dtim, pbyak- 

waw dh-mitsisut. 

‘niyd 1” ttdw; “kiwéh 1” itdwrutdma; “ dkusi, ntawihsimisitik, 

ndlamuk  eisthkipilakandyapiyah {” dtdw, . 

dkusit ndtamwak ; pdtawak, usdwapiskayiwa pisdkandpiya. sthkip~ im 
ildw. d-kisdhpitdt, dkus ist kisthdw ; qrihtukdwdpindw. awin bhi, Kemitg ., nid 
~ -usiyiwa ulakuhpah aw oskinikiw kit-dlakuhpit, . hp 
dkust min dh-lipiskdyth,.dsay mina kiskwihkwasiyiwa. _ 
tyikuhk min Gh-Gpisihkwasit, dsay mina, ‘ hdy, nmlawdsimisitik, ths ul _ 
nohtdy-atuskdyan | dkuyikuhk kd-poni-kiskwéhkwasiyan {” cae of 
kiksind matstw ; waiwdskdsiwa nipahdw. hd, pdsiwdw misirwd. 
dkusth Gsay mina, “ héiy, nitawdsimisitik, pahkwdkisuhk 1" itwiw. 
_ pahkwikisamawdw. 
“dkwah ntdm ntawi-ntumihk, kita~mitsisow," itwdw. ~ 
a mitsisow aw dlim. kitamwiw. dkwah tipwi mistahi misikitiw dkwah ri 
aw dlim. nama kith-pihtukdw mikiwahpthk. dsay misikitiv. v7 

“ hdy, mawdsimisitik, ay-dskaw 6ma tah-takuwdls pikuh dh-atuskiyan, 
k-dat-miyusiyan, ’’ itwéw. 

dkust mina kisthéw Ghi akuhpah. dh-tipiskdyik dsay mina hiskwithk- 
wasiw, kiyipa dpahkawisiw. dkusi kiksépa mdtsiw. takwdhnawah nipa- 
hdw. néhtéhkatdw aw-uskinikiw ; 3 dkwah apsis wdskitohk uhtinam wiydsis, 
d-nawatsihisut, dh-mitsit. 

ké-kisi-mitsisut, ‘'' 6ma k-dsi-maskawisiydn kit-Usi-maskawisiw awa 
_____-_nésisim 12 _nikihatikuh nohkum_l_mahtih nike-sdkuhaw awa mustus, d-wih- 

ulapiydn |” itwéw, Ghi kd-kih-naydmdat d-kth~itikut. 

dkusi kiwdtsitapdw, “ t-dluskdw dkwah 1” dh-iléyihtahk. dkus dhe 
takuhtahat. 

“ hay, dkwah kd-pahpakwatsiwaydn?!" itwéw awa k-otihkumit. 

dkust d-kisi-pahkwakisumiht, “ ntdm ntawi-ntumihk 1" itwdw. 

ntawi-ntumimdwa. 

piyd-takuhtayit, “ mitsisuh, nim 1” itwiéiw. 

dkwah aw dtim atstyaw kah-miyamdlt, kuntah wasakémdskawéw ; nama 
wth-mowdw. 4 


= 


11 take this to be as-iyinihkakit : “the way he cures me,” but it docs not make sense. 
*Tf{ an intransitive verb can be formed with tud- (from pohpakwal-: “amuse’’), 
this form is intelligible. More likely it ia either an error of record: or f,; Nonsense form, 
starting as a verb, but ending with the nominal final -weydn: “hide of fur.” 
Q 


/ 


s 


200) 


“ lanihk dwa adhd kd-uih-mitsisut, naka, kitdm 1” oe 
“ndh, nitaudsimisitik, nama tsi maka kdkwah kétawdyihtam 1” itwdw 
dkusi, “ nama lt kdkway kiwdpindn 2?” ttdwak undpdmiwdwa. 

“ apisis waskitohk nikih-maniswaw, dh-mowak,'” itwdw. 

“ndh, ajistyiniw dtukd k-onahahkimiyan, nikthatdyihidh | dlatk ani 
wihtikow f dyiwahk moh iskwastsikan 1 itdw. , 

mowiw. kitamwuiw. dkwah lapwd misikitiw aw dim. 

Ghelipiskdyik kiethdw ohit mustuswaydna, 

“ dyakw ana kit-dlandskdniw ninahdhkim,” itwdw. 

dkwa min d-tipiskdyik, Gsay mina kiskwdéhkwasiw, dhnbhtdy-dtuskdl. 
d, sipwihtdw kiksdpd. tay d-walsiwiyik dkutah ituhldw. wapahtam wak- 
aydsi-walih, takuhldw dkutah, 

“nimusoh, nipd-ndldn kiyaw, d-mawindwukawiydn 1" ttdw. 

 tedekwah, nosisd | Oma nipahiyini, nisu ulinaméhkan nimihistow- 
dnah, tspist takuhldyini kikiwahk, pdyak mateustdhaméhkan. ‘ pd-kalwi- 
misk Omah |? idhkan. dkwah anih kd-mawindhwisk manitéwiw. wapahkih 
nikdn ulihkumah ka-kakwd-miskdmawah. pdyak miskdmatst, dkus dani 
kikaspaskiyawdw ulawdsimisah ta-kiwdhtahimat,” itik é6hi wakaydsah. 

dkusi pdé-wayawiyiwa. nipahdw. 4d, kiwdlsttdpdw. ulinam hi nis 
upiwiyiwa. pdyak, ch-pihtukdl, matsustéhgr piyak kanawdyihtam. 

dkwah éh-takuhtit, “haw, nlawdsimisitik, nlawi-pahkwdkisuhk dyak- 
unih. nnahahkim kit-stakuhpiw,” itdw unahahkisima. . 

dkwah éh-kisi-pahkwdkiswatsik, maka: mina atim nlawi-ntumaw. 
dkust miwdw bhi wakayésa; kitamwaw. dkwah hiwdlisahwiw uldma. 
dkusi dkwa Ghi wakaydswaydna bm ohisi k~osiwdyik upisdkandpim dlay 
d-sithkipitat, d-kisahpitdt, kdydpits askdkinéwiyiwa. namuya kisthdw 
aniht wékayésiwaydnah. kaw apihkundw. 

“kutak ndtamuk, nitawdsimisitik 1” itwéw. 

paldwak kutak qisékandpiy d-kaskitiwayik. dy-ata-sthkipitsihkakde, 
nama kié-kixihdw ; kdydpits askékinowiyiw. piyis dpahwiéw. 

“ mahti kutak, nlawdsimisitik 1” 

pakaskih-askdhtakwapdkaniyiw ; pétdwin. nama kidh-kisihdw dyapits. 
dkuyikuhk kdkdts wapaniyiw. dsay mina Gpahwdw. 

“ nilamasimisitik, maht anima kd-mihkwapiskak nipisakanapim dwakuh 
ndtamuk, ékwah ntahkdémasiniy, dkwah ntsikahikan, dkwah niyiwahikand- 
pisk, dyakunih. kakwd-mamiyék. dhéaya wandpdkinamuk. wdsed nkak- 
wdtlakihtk, dkdya kih-kisthak awa, nnahahkim kit-otakuhpit 1” itwdw. 

tapwd dy-dla-pdtwawiht, uhtsitaw nama kdh-kisihiw. Gpihkupitéw, 
kunt itih dy-si-wdpindt. wdmihk uhtsi astaw upisakandpim. dsay ugpan- 


“tikiwdsimisitik, maht dkwah utinihk nnahahkim ka-wih-utakuhpil. ” 
ryat-Gindtsik, kdydpits askdkinuwiyiwa. : 

_ _akusi, * hay, dkwah maka péyakwaw dsay nisdkétsihik nnahahkim | 
kéyapits’ piyakwéw !” itwéw ; “maka wiya nnahdhkim wiya nikdn kita- 


pmutahk 1” ttrk, ; 

hGh, utinam ima wakayos upiwayiw. 

“wapaht 6ma! kispin aka miskamanth, kiltawasimisak nika-kiwéh- 
tahéwak,” itaw. 

wépinam. dh-dta-nitunahk aw iskwasis, nama kth-miskam. 

kitahtawd, “ hdy, mahti kit-otindkaniwiw {”? 

udpahiam ; wiy dwa uskinikiw utinam. 


Ms 
“ 201 


, h , ‘maka dkwah maka nnwhdhkim kd-kakwd-miskawdl .ntihkumah 
pdyak | 
(tH yiwa ulstkahikan, ulahkdmasiniy, piwdpiakwah pisisik, 
ds ie hah, Gtah maka kit-depiskwdsimow 1" ubtsikwanthk, 


 mayaw d-nahisihk aw tskwdsis, nama kdkway utihkumah. mi-misiwd 
tah dh-dla-ntunawdl aw uskinikiw, nama kth-miskawdw. 

4 haw, nnahahkim,' ayis numa kiki-miskawdw; dkwah mdka kd- 
pakamahulan 1" itdw, ; 

Mw Niytkuhk ohi sdkuhtdyani, akuyikuhk kika-pakamahun |’ 

Trad nikanah tmatiwdpinam., pat Ohi d-misdytkth piwdpiskwah 
aapin itam, ikpimihk, min old muhtsihk. ' 

“ hdy, nnahahkim, ayikuh maka sdkewhtayani Ohi, dkuytkuhk kd-pimitis- 
ahutan 1" j 

| dydla-txtkahahki, piyisk mdststhtitdw utstkahikan. dkwah utahkam- 
aginiy mdststhiitaw min dwakd. | 

dkwah, “hay, tapwd nikisiwahik! nnahdhkim ! ntém, dstam 1” itéw 
uldma; “ haw, ntdm, mils Ghi 1" itdqo. 

mayaw d-sdmahtahk aw dtim, tapiskéts wiyds. kiytpah kitaw. 

" nyd, nidm, kiwih | niuth-nlaw'-pakomahauaw yd nnahahkim |” 
pimittsahwiw ; txtkahikan pikuh tahkunam. kistwak dh-askokut, 
ulahk tsiwipinam uskdlsihk, ; 
ve “ lah mistw-ukdminakasiwoéhtikwak kit-chpikiwak |” itwdw aw uskini-~ 
iw, 

Glihkimilik tdnétdni misw-bkgiminakasiyak | wdtthiahk awa, iydta- 
tstkahahk, kiytskikahwdtel, wdlsipitdtsi, potih nama pihkuhow, ta-kih- 
tawinahk, ultima tdpwitdw. tépwi takusiniyiwa. 

“hdw, nldm, mow oki 1" ttdw. 

dsay mina alieméwdw Shi mistikwah ukdéminakasiya. min dyakuni 
kitamwiw. 

“nind, kiwd, nitéim!” itwau, 

kiwdw awa dtim. nawaswdw aw tskwasis k-otihkumit. kdydpits utstk- 
ahikan pimiwitdw. kisiwdk dhraskokut, shkumah ka-kih-miyikut asiniyah 
tapahkdwipindw. 

“ Gtah utasiniwaleiyiw ! itdmthk dkuté nik-dydn 17’ itwdw. 

dkwah tydtah-wd-kakwd-pikinikahwdat 6h asiniyah, piyisk mdstsi-misi- 
“ wandtsthidw utdpatsihtsikana. 

“ haw, nitim, pd-sipwahti 1" itwaéw, dh-lépwat. 

-lapwd kiyipa takusiniyiwa. 

“nldm, nahah itamihk kd-pimisihk nawi-nipah !” itéw. 

dkwah atim awa asiniyah ati-miwéw. piyis utthtéw. 

“dkdya pikupis, nitim ! tapiyahk kaskikwan [” 

dkusi totam. nipahdw. 

dkwah nahah ayisiyiniw kd-kihtimit, usimah awa dyaku, dsah wistéwa 
kd-sipwdhtdyit, umisah piku nisiwak. dkwah ndha misdskwat ayaw dskusit 
dyiskwayik, nandtuhk dy-itasinahikdtayik, ispimihk iahkupisuyiwa mdk- 
wanah pdyak. dkwah dyaku pik otinam. umisah kamwatapiyiwa, aGh- 
prkiskdtaytt ustmiyiwa.. . . 


p 


1 Her sudden violation of tabu i in addressing hini directly implies that he no longer 
counts as # person; it is all up with him. 


202 


“hdw, nimisd,” twiw, “mahtth nistés nka-ntunawdw 1" ttwdw ; 
“dkwah awa ponih-wipapihkdpayitsih, ‘ dkuytkuhk dsa_ masi-wandtsthut 
nisim,' kik-dldyihtin,” itwéw, dh-wayawit, ah-wdpapihkdéwaépindt upih- 
tatwanah. 


wa-vipipthkdpayiyiwa. sipwéhiiw. misdskwatsus iahkunam. ksthkut- . 


sin, kd-stpwéhidt. dkwah tipwé utihtaw ustésah, éh-pimisiniyit, éh-nipiyit, 
Ohi mikwanah Omis ist ydyahwiw, Gm Ghisi émistsikumis. 

“ nstisd, waniskah 1" ttaw. 

waniskayiwa, dakusi tapwd pimdtisiw awa kd-ydyahuht. witséwéw 
ustdsah, iteuhtdr, 

di-takuhtat, “hd, nstisé, ké-waipahk pd-ituhtéhkan," itéw. 

“ Ghat," itik, 

dkwah ituhtéw ohih haw-utthkumiyit, ké-~pd-sdkdwéyit uskinikiskwawa. 

“hdy ! akutéh ayah !"" itthk> “awiyak dsiskakédtst, dwakuh kika- 
wiwin,” ttdw. ; 

papahtayiwa. nam awiya nakatimdwa ; tapiskéts takupahtaytwa. 

“dGkwah nikindhk ituhtdtan 1" dick, 


d, tépwé ituhtdwak. hah, d-pihtukdtsik, héyapits dkusi isinakusiw aw — 


iskwisis. 
“hay, kékway um éh-papd-ndltaman ?" 
“4, iskwiéw éh-ntunawak, d-wth-witsdwak,” itwaéw. 
“dkwah neha wiwih 1” -_ ms 
kitipamdw. 
“usd utihkumiw,” itéw, 


2 


“hdy, nitawdsimisitik, kiyawdw_dtukd piritéyimut ! kiyawaw unép- 


dmik 1” itth. Libis 

dkwah é-tipiskayik; Kawisiméw. ask ikasiw aw iskwisis. 

‘“mitunth nnéhidy-atuskdn'! mistahi “nindhtdh-atuskan ! dtukd d- 
kihtimit awiyak kah-pé-nahahkapit |!" ttwéw aw iskwésis. ee 

simak kiksépad sipwéhidw. mituni kiyipa utihtam ustdsa itah ha-kth- 
uhtsth-nipahdyit wakaydsah. dkutah takuhtaw. 

“nimusé, kipd-natitin, dh-mdtawiydén anuhts kd-kisikak 1” itéw. 

‘aha’, nésisé | tsdskwa nisu nimistéwanah utinamehkan. mwiy ata 
wiya kindsGwdyimitin, waydsiyawaw kistés. dkust mayaw takuhtahiyini, 
simak utdmah ta-nétisahwéw, utdpatsihtsikanah,” dtéw ; -Gdkust, “ hdw, 
Gkwah !” ith, 

pakamahwaw ; nipahdw. kiwdtsitapéw.. kiksdépa mitunih takuhtahdw. 
mayaw ah-pihtukdt matsustéham uma péyak ; piyak pimiwitar. 

Gkwah Gh-pahkwawisumiht, “ nitawasimisittk, .ndtamuk ntsikahikan, 
nimihkihkwan, ,nimdnihtwiyask, nitahkamasinty, nisékipitakandyapiyanh, 
ahtahtikih ntépatsihisikanah.. \ Gkwak kiya, nlants, papd-ntunaw nkusts 
kstés,” itdw ;-ptyisk, “ haw, ntawi-ntum kiya niim,” itaw uténisa péyak; 
“Gkwah, ‘ usam utihkumiw,’ ukth-iiwah 1” . 

ayis kistmaw, k-bh-ndtittsa wat ukusisah. dkwah dh-pd-takuhtdt aw 
dtim, iskwahtémihk ispayihéw awa uskinikiw. nam dskw d-sihkipitimiht 
6ht wikaydsiwaydna, dsay ka-paxtakusihk aw atim. dkust ah-pihtukat, 
kurtah kd-pé-patapdyowaytt, ka-pa-sasawdpikiyit, iapiskéts kidkway d-kus- 
ank, “ ‘ . _ . 

__ akwah dmis iidw awa misaskwatsus k-dydt Ghi ; mis itdw ahi atimwah : 
“awa tsi d-mamisiyin ?” itéw, d-samahwat 6h atimwah. 


. \ 
?Some tool; the final is ~éskw- : “wood, stick.” 


se 3 


203 
wean 


mkupayiw aw alinr ; iyawdpiskipayiw. 

_ Ohi nina dy-dsastdéyihih,”" dha tsi d-mamisiyin ?” iléw, uldpatstht- 
sikaniyiwah akind dh-atih-sdmakamudl. dkust dh-atih-pikupayiyikih, nama 
 kdkway aw iskwisis iskuhtawdn ; mdslsthidwdn tahtuh ké-mamisit, 

_ “hdw, dkwah kitihkumak nka-nétsihdwak. pdyak miskawakth, dkust 
kitawdsimisak nika-kiwahtahdwak, ” wéw. 

“aha,” ttwdw aw ishwdsis, 

_ a-kitapamikut, misiwa ukkwakanihk thkwah; ékwah pisindy d-péy- 
utihtapiskwayit, dsay sémahamwan uslikwan ; nama hi-kutdwiyewa utth- 
kumah. mdnnakisk takwaépishatahwiw thkwah. hitahtawd kéh-kwdtipisk- 
windw; pikw id Gldpitsch thkwah pisisik, Mlahtawd ld-pakitsitutakut 
thkwah awa mistsikus k-dydt. dkw d-kwahkutdyik dkutah ttsinam uma 

_mistsikus. kwahkutdyiw, dkwah ohi kd-pakitstytt thkwah dkutah Gmistiku- 
mihk kd-matwitaydhkasuyit. mdkwdis dkus dh-tétahk, kitaktawd kd-taku- 
sthk aw uskinikiw, wipats kayahtd kha-wapamdt ubdwiya d-ndtsthimiht 

‘ ttihkumiyitwa. ; 
‘3 “hdy, kdkway 6ma d-kih-ndiaman, awa kistéskis kd-mdstsi-misi-wandl- 
_. -- Sthtdt ntdpatsihtsikanah ?” itik, _ - 

. tépiskamiyiwa kitsuhtsikanis, dkwah miohydpitsiskanis ulitsdhtsik- 
anisthk ah-tahkupitdyik ; dkwah piwdpiskus dh-apisdsiniyik pdmakdmask- | 
amiyiwa. a 

dkwah, “hah, naka, kitésami-mdstsihdwak kitihkumak, kdswin aka 
sdkuhikawiyahkuh, dyakunitk ta-mdkinawiyin, ayis nhi-pd-ntumikawin, 
ayisiyiniw d-kitimakdyimiht, nista dh-wihtamawak, dkwah éké ma-mayaw 


\ k-oh~pd-kiwayén. “usdm, naka, kimatsi-natsihtan, ” itik ukusisah. 
\ awasis awa d-mistataydt, d-musdskatdt, mdstatéw-awdsis awa ; ukustsah 
\ awa k-6tihkumit. 


“ haw, nistah, dkwah maka niya {” ttwdw. 

dkusi poni-pokitsiyiwa thkwah. dkusth utinam_ muhydpitsiskanis. 
’ dkwah dkuyikuhk ké-takusihk awa atimwa kd-kih-nipahikut. 

“hd, nstdsd, wahyaw nispiskwanthk aya /” 


v dkus isiwipinam. - . oo, 7 
‘bo “ nawatahaman éma, ékust ké-paskiyawiyin /” itik. 


eta tanaas dig vekakwa-ndwdalahwaist’ kamamakusa dh-wdpiskisiytt, dskaw 
a name wapqmdw, kayahta mana kisiwak kd-pmakutsiniyit mana. 

s “ nk@-sakotsihikuh |” itéyihtam. 

if . y z Py => =? - . . ‘ ~ - ~~? 

* kitahtawd d-wapiskayik um Omisisikumis ydyinam ; . wapiskdyiw. 


* atah d-pimakutsiniyzt, dkwask itisinam. dkutah akuhkdw awa kamdmakus. 
; ulindw. utinam ; kunt tastaw. 

3 ‘“akwah uma |” itik. 

ee Gpahamiyiwa piwdpiskus; nétéh isiwdpinam awa mistatéwasis ; 


g misdyiw piwapisk éh-ndlimadyik. 
. - “ sakuhtayanth oma, ké-paskiyawiyin ["" ittk, ; : 
dkwah d-with-kakwd-chtastat, nama kaskthiaw. kdtahtawd d-nayauit, 
d-wa-wapahtahk uma mistik, ka-wapahtahk éh-askihtakwdytk., sdminam ; 
dkutah utsthtsthk misiwé ayisihtitaw. utinam wma piwapisk; sdskwdts 
uhpinam tapiskdts é-yahkasiniytk, " 
‘ha, nistéh, dkwah maka ké-mésihituyahk, ta-witsdwayahkuk, ta- 
ntomayahkuk. awiyak sdkuhihisih kit-Gtahwdw ulépatsthtsikanah, -- naka, 
kahkiyaw tst kitapatsihtsikanah ?” 


a 


204 


“namuya. aydpits aniki upahtsdwiyak,' itah kite-nipawiyin," tdw 

ukusisah. 
“ haw, kiya.ntkan ntum kita-witséwatsik {" 

kituhiaw awa mistataw-awdsis ; misahisi-pétsiméw kiyikaw muhtsihk 
uhisi. dkwah awa mitsdskwatsus k-Gyat éyaku misiw itd ttwahikdkdw kikaw 
muhisthk. adkwah uwitsiwakaniwawa dh-akimdlsik, potih awa misdskwatsus 
k-dyat payak dyiwakipayiyiwa upawdkanah. itamihk k-dydtetk askihk 
uisapihkasisak d-wapiskisiyit, ayiwakipayiyiwa pdyak dyakunt. dkwah 
masihitowak wistawa, aspin ispimihk a-yahkimukih ohi itah ka-nipawitsik. 

kitahtawd ndh dkwah pihtatwén mistahit wiéipapthkdpeyiw. dkwah 
nahah, “ dkwah dsah nisim miydlawét }” itaythtam ; “ ata wiya pakahkam 


_manitowiw ; kahkiyaw kékway Kih-wihtamawdw,” itéyihtam. 


4 


hdtahtawd, “ naka, niwi-sdkuhik. kimdstinén tsi?” 

“ namuya ninayawin, ” itwéw awa k-dtihkumii iskwésis. 

“ maht dwaku paétah } nka-téhisikadpawin. " 

“* namuya dkuiéwahk, nkusis /” itwéw. ; , 

mistikwak dskusitsik, dkuyikuhk déh-pdy-dydtsik, kdw-utinahk upiway 
awa k-dtihkumit, Gmaldwihk wahtsthk? dh-utinahk. pakamaham uma 
miststkus, nama kéh-yahkimow. 

ukwah naha pwaistawats wipadpihkdpayiw. 

“ hdy, uskats d-pawdmiyan, utsapthkdsis, mistwd Mstkuhk askihk ta- 
papdmipikaméwe kipisékandpima /” ttwéw. ~ 

makuhaw akwah. hé, papimaémiw dkwah, &h-nawaswétiht. akwak 
néh iskwéw péhpdkahadkan aydw, dkwah. dy-dpisdsiniyik ahkdmasinis. 
pakamahams piyisk piwapisk tdpiskots dh-dhi-misdyik, téhisikdpawiw. 

“uskats dh-pawadmiyan, ndydwats ta-pimakutsihk, ta-sipwéhtahit awa 
kd-maékuhaét nisima ! dkutéwahk niki-wihtamdku ! dkwah niwtkimadkan 
upakamakan kit-ch-pasastihwak awa ka-téhtsikapawiyan, ta-kistkutsihk !* 
iwdw. os . 

pakamaham. 

“dah nisim umistsikumis k-dydyik, dkutd ituhtahin 1" itwdw. 

pimakuisin, mikwéts namuya kwayask thtiw; utdsiyaniw aw iskwéw, 
dw-utthtat usima, 

“ héy, utihkumiv-iskwéw ! méstaléw ké-nayawihat nisimah nikitimak- 
dyimimah {7 itwdiw. . , i 

dpthkundw utdsiydna ; pasastéhwéw ohi kawiyah. 

mistatiw-awdsis pahkisin, oki mina kdwiyak. . ; 

“hay, nistah, k-Gtahun ntépatsihtsikanah, dydpits péyakwaw kiwih- 
mélawin, dwakunth nikdwty.utihkumah, édyakuni kik-dpatsihdw,s dkwah 
ht piwdpisk. ati-miyuskamiki, mituni nipihki, dkutah ka-wih-métawdyin. ” 

dkust hiwdwak. takusinwak wikiwahk. 

“hd, dkwah wéwis mistahi manitéwiw !” itéyithtam awa ndtukdwa 
ka-kth-nayomdt. ; ‘ . 


° 


_  +Animate plural noun; meaning? The translation is surely wrong, Later in the story 
it seenis that the things, whatever they are, consiat of kdutyak : “porcupine quills.” , 
As piway is “body-hair” this word is probably “armpit” or “pubes.” It is evidently 
4 dependent noun, i.e. one which always hes a possessive prefix. . 
> He does not tell what it was she stood on and struck. 
+ Out of construction; he should have said kik-dpatsihimdwa, since the object is 
obviative. Similarly, though hi: “these” ia plural, only one of the objects, the iron, is 
mentioned, the thong omitted. 


. 205 


dkhus d-nininiyth, kdkdts dkwah wistéwa ta-takdsiniytt, kitehtawdh 
d-pitsitsil, dh d-kaniisitsik, hilahlewd kd-pd-sdkdwiyit wyisiyiniwah mituni 
éh-kawahkatusuyit, mistsikus k-dydt, ndh-niway kd-tohkupitdyikth d-bes- 
kipitayikih, dkwah awa kayuhtd miststhus k-dydl. 

. dkwah dh-pd-takusihk, * tawdw 1” ttdw. 

dkwah, ' 4, tanist 6ma? tantd dw-uhtuhtdyin 1” tlédw aw uslisimadw. 

“ msdskwatsusthk,” 

“ tdnid maka?” ; 

“ misdskwatsusthk, ntitwan 1" 

“ kdkway make d-papti-ndlaman ? " . 

“nind-wiwin, tantih awa k-dpit! kimisiwaw? usm kistiwiw kipa- 
paémaskatikuwdw. ” 

“namuya ka-kih-wiwin." 4° 

A 7 btah nisimak kisiwik. piy-Gyawak, kiyawd mina dyakunik ta-wiwi- 

yan, 
hd, nama tapwihtamwak. 

“ nisawdts kika-mdlawdndnaw {"' ihodw awa kd-kawahkatusut dwaku, 

“haw, kiya wikdn 1" ttaw awa thkwah k-dydwdt. 

kiyam mamitundyihtam, thkwah to-pokitstyit. pakitsitutdk awa ka- 
kawdhkatusut, ntsawdts kwahkutéhk ttisinam éma mistatkus kd-tahkunahk, 
dkwah d-kisisutsik ok thkwak, nundtuhk matsi-pisiskiwak, mohtdwak, ayik- 
isak, dyakunih aéh-utihkumit awa. dkuat kdkdts d-mdstsihimikt, poydw. 
dkwah 6ma muhydpitsiskan ; sdémak dmis istwipinam ; akukkew dkutah. 
uma piwipish nité isiwépinam ; sdmak awa kd-kawahkatusul winam payak 
ulsihtsihk, d-siniktinahk oma piwapish ; nit dh-isiwdpinahk, kiy-apisd- 
simyiw.  dkwoh awa ntumdwak kit-uwitsdwakanitsik. potth awa kayahta 
k-Gydt misdskwatsus pdyak ayiwakipayiyiwa, itamihl: askihk k-aydtetk 
mohtsdsah d-wapishistyit. ; 

“ dkufdh dtsik Gnih kiy-dtdmuydn, kiy-dtamuyahk 1" dh-ttdyihtahk, 
kitahtawd j$Bh-Kisimuhk dkuld, “hddy, nistah, tawaydk { nakatamuk 
kimistikumiwtwa | niwih-takuhtan 1" . 

kdkway dtuké ké-pdtéwikutdytk, ka-pahkihtihk éma kaskipitsdsah, hd- 
tahkupitéyikih dwaku. “pahkihtin muhtsihk, dkwah oma kang Went 
uma, mistsikus), ka-pd-takusihk, haw, awa kd-namahisit, ka-muhyapitaragut. 

“ Gmah-tsdskwah ayisiyiniw kat-dtinam utsdpihk. “maskihkiy,' kit- 
dsiyihkdtam, k-h-péh-hitimadkdyimdt nistdw. dkwah omah, nistdw k-aydt 
ayisiyiniw, ‘misdskwat, nipisis,’ t-dstyihkdtam, t-Oh-pimdtsihule haw, | 
kiwah, nistah. iyinindhk ituhtah. Gka wiya kakdpdte-totak. aka wrya’ 
ninahtakéh, -itik wistawa; “‘dkwoh kiya ka~pd-mdtawiyin, nilakam 
ituhtéh. dkwah kisimak iskwéwok 6tah apihtd-hisikahk kit-dsi-sipwihtiwak. 
usam tahkih kiwith-papd-mdtawan, dh-uyasuwahk ta-miywasik askiy, ayisty~ 
iniw ta-sdkaskindt askihk,” itwiw; ‘‘dkwah- niya otah muhisihk nik-<isi~ 
kiwan. kahkiyaw nika-kitimakéyimik ayisiyiniw kikih nivikimakan. 
dkwah kiya, nistah, dpakusisak ké-kinwdywwatsik kik-dkutéwiwin. dkwah 
niya, ‘ tsinustsuwiydkanisis,’ k-dtwdtsik ayisiyiniwak, dkutowakk niya 1” 

kipipaythow ; dpakusistwiw uwikimdkana kikih ; mitunt apisisistwak. 

dkuyikuhk dskwak dtayéhkdutn. 


1 Literally, “In which place is this one who sita your sister?’—there being three 
seated women. Questions of identity are often put in this form. 


83180~r14 


206 


Once upon a time there were three people,.two men and one woman, 
two men. The men were the younger brothersof the woman. The youngest 
one did not work. He took a stick of saskatoon willow; he kept it, walk- 
ing with it as a cane. His elder brother hunted, providing them with food. 

Then at one time, when they had a big supply of food, the elder 
man said, ‘‘Well now, brother, suppose I look for someone to be our brother- 
in-law, so that our sister may have a husband. If-we have him for brother- 
in-law, we shall not be embarrassed, when a man is here.” , 

“Very well,” the other answered him. 


., Presently he set ‘out and tramped along. After one night on the way, - 
“He saw a tipi. It steod with the door facing the direction of noon. Then 
as he looked, he beheld a-crow holding together the tips.of the tent-poles. 

When he came there, that creature at the top of the tent gave a call. 

“Come in!” it called to him. ; 
“He entered.. There was a man.all alone. When he had eaten, 2 man 
arrived, another youth. 
hi He said, ‘What are you seeking, that you wander about?” he asked 

im. . as A 
“Why,” he said, “my idea ‘in wandering about is this: ‘Suppose I 
get a brother-in-law,’ is my thought; ‘I shall give him my elder sister,’ 
is my thought, concerning you, for I am inconvenienced by. my sister’s 
never speaking; that is why I have come to give her to you.” 

“Yes,” the other.answered him; ‘As for me, I do not care about it; 
but perhaps my younger brother right here will like the idea,’’*he told him. 

“Oh, as yet I am-nodt good enough at killing things, to ‘be able to 
marry, I above all, seeing that even you, who are good at killing things, 
do not like the idea... _- oy 

“Dear me!’ said the elder; ‘Near by here live three of my younger 
brothers and one elder brother, four of them; his three younger brothers 
take care of him. They are very good at killing game,” he told him; “So 
you had better go there,” he told him; ‘You had better go see them. 
Perhaps one of them will take to the idea,” he told him. 

_ , He went there. As he came over the crest of the hill, there he saw a 
tipi. He saw what held the tips of the tent poles together, an owl, which 
already was giving its call. He went there. 

Just as he reached the place, “Come in, young man!” he“was told. 


So he went there. He entered. He was given food. - When he had 
eaten, look you, a young man came into the tent. .He hung up some 
quivers. 

/ “Hello, what is your errand, that you come here like this?” asked 
the eldest of the brothers, - ° 


He told him, “Oh, it is that I have’com i i 
elder nae gm ’ ve come to give one of you my sister, 

“As for me, I am only given food by my younger brothers. I am no 
good at killing any kind of game. I could not have a wife,” he told him; 
and then, “Now,-brothers, some one of you go there!” , 

They answered him, ‘Ho, as if we were any good as yet at killing game! 
I shall not be able to go/there,” said ali of them. 4 

; Dear me, young njan! At the other side of this hill lives my fa her. 
He lives with his four eldest sons, and these our elder brothers are not yet 


‘op 


married; nor are the two young women, our younger sisters,’”’ he t 
9 tp my se 
“pr “Se 


Cy eee 


ro 


_ 207 
him; “Go there. Perhaps my father will give you three of hie children, 
two women and one man, if my father wishes to give them to you,” he told 
im } 
Accordingly, he Jeft the tent. Eagerly he weit to ithe dace that had 
been indicated to hi. And as on his way he came, over | the crest of a hill, 
there really he saw a tipi that stood with its doorway ‘toward noon. As 
soon as he saw it, he was seen by the creature which held together the tips 
of the a an eagle. At once the eagle gave its ery. He reached 


‘the tipi 


“Ho, gome in!”’.he was told. 

He entered. Whom did he see| but an old man and an old woman, 
and no one else he saw but them, sitting. alone on a thing like this blanket, 
like thié on which I am sitting now; and, “Come in!” he was told. 

heri=he-had come in, ‘““Now, old wothan, give him food! Let him 
eat!’/ was said about him.. 

In due time he was given food. When he had eaten, suddenly there 
came some people with loud noise, two women, talking both at once. When 
they had come in, he saw that they were young girls. When they had 
taken their seats, some more people came in, four men. 

Then the other said to him, “Now then, young man, how is it you 


-havé ‘come tramping all the way here?” asked the old man; “Have you 


‘ come to be with my children here?” 


~ 


‘*Yes,”’ he answered him. 

“But what is the aim of your wandering about?” ‘a 

“Oh, because those children of yours told me, ‘You had better go ~ * 
there. ‘The fact is, we are in a difficult position with , our elder sister, 
because we are alone with her, so that my sister never ‘speaks; that is, 
I-and my one younger brother, a young man, we are alone: with her now. 
‘Perhaps you will find a brother-in-law in one of them there; my father 
will urge his children,’ said your son, and that is why I have come to you.” 

“Well now, young man, these women children of mine have not yet 
learned to sew, 80 that they could take a man; in fact, they are even 
now engaged in learning to sew. Well, so I cannot give them to you,’ 
he told him; ‘Now then, as for you, my ‘children, let one of you go there,” 
he said to those four men. 


Fach and every one, ‘Nonsense! I too am a long ways from wanting 

to marry just now!’ all those men said to him. 
' “Dear me, young man! You see that my children will not hear of it. 
You had best turn back from here and go home. If you will not do that, 


* at least do not go in this direction here,” he told him. 


So.he left the tipi. He went in the direction against which he had 
been warned. As he tramped along and came over the crest of a hill, there 
he saw a little lodge of smoked leather. He went there. As he stood in 
the doorway, he looked up at the tips of the lodge-poles:’ he saw a little 


‘ smoke coming forth. Just as he was about to enter, as he peeked in, in, 
” 


whom did he see, but a very old woman? * * * * .* 
“But do come in, grandchild!” she said to bim.’ 
“Well, at any rate she is an old woman. * * * * * * * 
he thought. He went in. The old woman turned to face him. 
' “What are you going about for?” she asked him. 
83186144 


* 


208 N 

“T am going about looking for a man to be. my brother-in-law,” he 
told ao have you seen my father-in-law who lives close by?” she asked 
him. . . 


“Have you a wife?” 

“No.” . . ‘ 

“But have you seen my sisters-in-law?” 

“Vos,” 7 yO ; . : . “ 

“They are the ones I am teaching to sew. As soon as they are good 
at sewing, they are to take husbands,” she told him; “I am the one for 
you to woo,” said. the little old woman. 

‘Oh, you are too old, grandmother,” he answered her. 

“Why! So now for the first time a mortal man rejects me! All those 
whom you saw on your way here are my husbands, and here you refuse to 
marry me!” ‘ 

“Oh, grandmother, you are too old!” 


He rose to his feet as he said this to her. The old woman made a 
leap, and took hold of him here, ‘and threw her legs round him, and. clasped 
him here round the neck with her arms. The old woman kept a tight 
hold. Though he tried to pull her free, he could not move her; his grand- 
mother was too strong. He carried her about like a pack-load, * * * * * * * 
The youth was ashamed. ‘Then he wandered helplessly about. He went 
to the tipi of an old man, a place of which he had dreamt, the youth. He 
as a very old man. When he arrived, the other came forth from the 
odge. 

“Dear me! Why are you being carried here like a pack, wife?” he 
asked her. ; : 

“Yah, because this person rejected me when I told him, ‘Woo me!’ 
Because he rejected me, is why I thought, ‘Then let him at least, carry me 
on his back.’ Those fellow-husbands of yours, handsome as they are, 
every one, none of them refused me. Do not argue with me. This person 
has angered me by refusing me.” ; ' 

“Alas, young man! There is a lake close by here. You had better 
go there. Vor there stay two of our grandchildren, whom she you are 
carrying indulges. But as for me, I fear my wife,” said the old man. 

He wert off with his pack. Really, he came.to a lake, and there came 
two young women, laughing gaily. . 

“Hey, why are you agaim acting like a child, being carried here on 
someone’s back?” oo. 

_ “Oh, do not reason with me, my grandchildren! When this person 
rejected me and angered me, I decided, ‘Then at least let him carry me 
round on his bick’.” . 

; Wherever he slept of nights, still he had-her on his shoulders ; he lay 
with his pack. So those young women said nothing, 

“I shall have to take-her to my dream-guardians,” he thought. 

So he carried her round to these places, 

Whenever he reached 
fear her!” he would be told. 


Nothing could be done to her, to shake her loose. At Jast he had 
gone to all of his dream-guardians without avail. ‘So there he was. 


_dream-guardian of his, “Alas, grandson, I 


209 


“There is nothing in sight but that she will kill me, that I starve to 
death,” he thought. 


Then in time he would scarcely reach any place for which he was * 


bound. At last, what a sight it was, when he slept anywhere, as he kept 
carrying the old woman on his: back! Then at one time he saw a brook, 
towards evening, a brook which beavers had dammed. He went there. 
Over on yonder bank he saw some water-weeds; here and there were sticks 
-<f wood that had been shaped. 

“Oh, I shall,go lic on yonder bank, I may as well die over there,” 
he thought. 

He found that ‘he could barely move as he lay. 


“J had better ferawl. It is plain that this old woman means to kill 
e,” he thought. / 


Presently he’started. He lay down by the side of the dam. It was 7 


dark now. He kept crawling. When he had almost reached the bank, he 
could go no farther. ~ 
| “Oh, tomorrow I shall get there,” he thought. 

Then he saw a man; he wore his clothes with the fur on the outside; 
he was clumsy in his movements; as he came, carrying a club in his hand, 
she whom he was carrying on his back, suddenly began to wriggle and 
squirm. 

“Pray do come here, brother-in-law!” said be who was/earrying the 
old woman. 

He came. He knew that she feared this person. > 

“Ho, how is it, brother-in-law, that you carry this oid woman on 


your back?” . _ 


“Alas, brother-in-law! Do, try to free me!” 

“Why, brother-in-law! But all you have to do i is club her, if she will 
not let go of you!” 

“Oh, grandchild, take pity on me! Please let: me live! Your brother- 
in-law will be engaging in contests again. I shall give him things to use. 
He will defeat people with what I shall give hiin: Pleage let me.tive, 
grandchild!” she said to him. 

Accordingly, ‘““Yesf Do not try to deceive my brother-in-law. If you 
try to deceive him, without fail I shall hear it. Now then, let him go!” 

She let go of him. 

Then, “Here, brother-in-law! “Eat this!” his brother-in-law said to 
him. 

He ate one berry; he was in flesh again; he was strong again. Then 
she gave him two needles, and two awls, and a ‘small stone; three gifts. 

“There, grandchild, you will be engaging in contests again!” the 
old woman told him who had carried her about. 

“Thanks!” 

Thereupon the old woman went back home. Andhe who was clumsy in 
his ways went to marry the elder sister of him he had met. 

So the latter went on, the next morning. When he came to a place 
‘ where the land was level and wooded, presently, as he was walking along, 
two women came into sight. 

“Hey there, sweetheart, stand still! Whichever gets there first, 
her you will marry; whichever is beaten, will have your younger brother 
for husband,” he was told. 


at 


/ 


210° 


He stood still. Those young women over there broke into a run. 
Neither one was beaten. — , 

“Well, let us go to our dwelling!’ he was told. 

They went to the place. He saw it; a tipi made of bits of old leather. 
They reached it. The youth was carrying 2 quiver. When they reached 
the tipi of old leather, the two pretty women went in. When they-enteted, 
over here, at the left of the door-flap, sat a little girl with mucus hanging 
from her nose, and her eyes all sticky; and lice were climbing ‘about all 
over this little girl’s face, and more, of course, on her head, and‘all over 


“her body and legs and feet, all over were lice. He looked at hery:: 


When the youth had eaten, “What.are you about secking?”* he was 
asked. Lo 
‘Why, I am going about looking for two women, one for my younger 
brother to marry, and one for me. I have already found a man to be our, 
brother-in-law.” - ’ _ 
“Indeed! So you are the one of whom they say, ‘He is seeking about 
fora wife,’ you are the one of whom this is said!” the young women told 
him, and laughed without cease. fe . 
"> €Yeg, it is I!” | a \ 
- “Flere is one for you to marry>* they said, pointing to the lousy girl. 
He looked at hers . A oo. ee 
“She is too lousy., I cannot marry her,” he said.; \ 
nejohe, children, do you take him for your husband ; he refuses:me.” 
‘Good!’ . y: ‘ "4 i ot 
Really, they took him for their husband ;- they both married him: 
. Then préently, for no reason at all the Lousy One suddenly crawled 
about. x é ter . is é so 
“Holt Se if 
They thisw her back. if 
f\ “How is it he always cures me?” said the Lousy One; “Why, children, 
dreantt that: I was working; .I dreamt that ¥ should stop walking in my 
sl ep a8 soon as I made something for my/son-in-law to use as a blanket- 
roben, I long greatly to work,” said the little girl, Lousy One. 
_ Accordingly, in the morning he went’ hunting; he killed a jumping- 
deer. He brought it whole. . . : 
‘Here, now, my children, skin it!” she told them. 
‘They skinned it,. , ; 
. “My children, go call my dog!” said Lousy One. 
‘ The Lo ey One called her dog. That dog turned out to be entirely 
ofiron, © - “=. a ; - —- 
“My dog, go eat. My son-in-law has killed something for you to cat.” 
The dog ate the jumping-deer. At once the dog grew big, when he 


1 
‘ 


_ had eaten that single meal. 


“Begone!” she said to it; “Go home!” she said to her dog; “So now, 


my children, go get-my-thongs for stretching hides! she told them. 


Accordingly, they fetched them; they brought them. The thongs 
‘were of yellow metal, _She stretched the hide. When she had tied it, she 
finished it; she flung it inside the lodge. Look you, very handsome was 
the youth’s blanket: that he was to have for his robe. 


Then, when night came again, again she walked in her sleep. 


211 


When she awoke from her trance, again, “Oh, my children, it is be- 
cause I am longing for work! Then I shall stop walking in my sleep!” 

In the morning he hunted; he killed a deer. He brought it entire. 

Then, again, “My children, skin it!” she said. 

It was skinned for her. 

‘Now go call my dog. He is to have a meal,” shesaid. 

The dog ate its meal. It ate all. Then truly very large grew that dog. 
It could not get into the tent. It had grown large, now. 

“Oh, my children, it is because only now and then I work, and little 
at-a time, that I am so beautiful,” she said. —_ ‘ 

Then she finished this robe, too. In the night again she walked in 
her sleep. Quickly she came out of her trance. So in the morning he hunted. 
He killed a bull buffalo. The youth was hungry; so he took a small bit 
of meat from the fleshy part of the leg and roasted it for himself and ate it. 

When he had eaten,'‘‘ ‘Even as strong as J am, so strong let this my 
grandchild be!’ my grandmother did say of me! Let me now be strong 
enough to handle this buffalo which I wish to drag!’’ he said, remembering 
what she had said to him, whom he had carried on his back. 

So he dragged home his load, thinking, ‘(Now she will have work!’ 
So he got it there. ; 

“Oho, now I shall have a jolly time!” cried the Lousy One. 

So, when it had béen skinned, “Go call my dog!” she said. 

It was gone for and called. 

When it came, ‘‘Hat, my dog!” she said. 

Then the dog, sniffing at it a little, merely walked in a circle round 
it; it would not eat it. 

“Why will not this creature eat, mother, this dog of yours?’’ 

“Yah, my citden, does he not miss something?” she asked. 

Then, “Did you not throw away anything?” they asked their husband. 

“T cut a little/from the fleshy part of the thigh and ate it,” he said. 

“Yah, and here was I thinking, ‘Doubtless a human man is he whom 
I have as son-in-law!’ So he is a Windigo! At any rate, eat the leavings!”’ 
she said to it. / ; 

It ate it. At finished it. Then truly big was that dog. 

By dark she had finished the byffalo-robe. 

“This let/my son-in-law have as\his sleeping-robe,’”’ she said. 

This night again she walked in. hersleep, because she longed for work. 
In the morning he set out. He went:to a hilly place. He saw a bear's 
den. He went up to it. . a 

“Grandfather, I have come to take your body, for I am being chal- 
lenged!’’ he said to it. 

“A moment, my grandchild! When you now slay me, then take two 
bristles from round my mouth. When you reach your dwelling, then 
throw one into the fire. ‘Come try to find this! say then to her. Indeed, 
she'who will challenge you has spirit power. Tomorrow, taking the first 
turn, you will try to find her,lice. If you find one, then you will have 
won from her the right to take her daughters home with you,” the bear 
told him. 

. With that it came out from its lair. He killed it. Oh, he dragged it 
home. He took those two bristles. One, as he entered, he threw into the 
fire. Orie he kept. | 


J 


212 . ) 


Then, as he arrived, ‘(Now then, my children, go skin that creature. 
My son-in-law shall have a blanket-robe,” she said of her son-in-law. 

Then, when they had done skinning it, as usual the dog was sent for 
and called. Then it ate the bear; it ate it all. Then she sent her dog 
back whence it came. But then, though she stretched that bearskin with 
her yellow thong, when she had got it all tied, it turned back into an un- 
dressed skin. She could not tan that bearskin. She untied it. 


“Fetch another, my children!’’ she ordered. 


They brought another thong, a black one. Though she worked at 
the stretching, she could not tan it; it turned back into an undressed hide. 
At last she untied it. ~ 

“Come, another, my children!” 

It was a bright green thong; it was brought for her. Still she could 
not finish the hide. By this time it was nearly dawn. Again she untied it. 

“My children, fetch now that thong of mine that is of red metal, and 
my pounding-stone, and my ax, and my meat-pestle, all these. Do your 
best. This thing is actually tormenting me, this thing I cannot tan, that 
my son-in-law may have a blanket-robe!” she said. : 

Truly, though the things were brought for her, yet she could not 
finish the hide. She undid the tying, and flung it away, she cared not 
where. She placed her thong down below. By this time it was daylight. 

“My children, take this now, which my son-in-law is to have for a 
blanket-robe.” | ; 

When they took it up, it was back in the state: of an undressed skin. 

Then, ‘Dear me, so now once my son-in-law has beaten me! Let us 
try again!’ she cried; “But it is my son-in-law who is to try first!” she 
said of him. . : 

He took that bear’s bristle. 

“See this! If you do not find it, I shall be free to take your daughters 
home with me,” he said to her. - 

He threw it away. Although the little girl looked for it, she could - 
not find it. . 3 ; . 

Presently, “Ho, let it be found!’ 

She saw it; it was the youth who took it into his hand. 

“Here it is!” 

Truly, there it was. 

“Ho, but now let’ my son-in-law try to find one of my lice!” 

There lay her ax, her pounding-stone, and all the things, all iron. 

Then, “Very well, but let her lay her hedd here!”’—on his knee. 

As soon as the little girl lay down in position, gone were her lice. 
Though vainly the youth sought them all over, he could not find them. 

“Now then, my son-in-law, since you have not been able to find one, 
now I shall club you!” she said to him. 

“Oho! When you get over these, then you shall club me!” 

_ He threw the needles so that they stood on end. There, they turned 
into huge iron things, going deep into the ground and high aloft and over 
the earth. 

ley son-in-law, but when I have got past these, then I will chase 
you! 

Vainly she chopped at them; at last she had worn out her ax. Then 
she wore out also her pounding-stone. yo 


‘ 


23 

Then, “Hey, truly my son-in-law is driving me into a rage! My dog, 
come here!” she called to her dog. “Here, my dog, eat these!”’ she called 
to it. 

As soon as the dog had touched them with its snout, they were like 
meat, and quickly it devoured them. 

“Be off, my dog, go home! I am going off to club my son-in-law who 
has just now left!” 

She pursued him; she had only her ax in her hand. When she was 
close upon him, he threw an awl behind him. 

“Here let great thornberry-trees grow forth!” said the youth. 

Behind him, what numbers of great thornberry-trees! When she 
reached them, though she hewed at them and split them with her ax, and 
pulled them up, yet she could not get through, could not make an opening 
through them. She hallooed for her dog. Truly, it came. 

“Now, my dog, eat these!” she told it. 

Again’ it went eating, this time the thornberry-trees. These too it - 
ate up. 

“Be off, go home, my dog!” she cried. 

The dog went back home. The Lousy Little Girl went in pursuit. 
Again she was carrying her ax. When she was close at his heels, he flung 
up into the air the stone his grandmother had given him. 

“Here is a place of rocky mountains! Underneath there I shall be!” 
he cried. 

‘Then, though she tried to smash those rocks with her ax, at last she 
wore out every one of her tools. 

“Fo, my dog, come here!” she cried, shouting. 

Truly, quickly it came there. - 

“My dog, go kill the one that lies down yonder below!” she told it. 

Then that dog went eating the rock. At last it reached him. ° 

“Do not tear him to pieces, my dog! Only strangle him!’ 

So it did. It killed him. | +. 

Then that lazy man off yonder, this one’s younger brother,-was all 
alone with his sister, for it seems that his brother-in-law had gone away. 
He had a saskatoon stick which was as long as he was tall, with all kinds 
of designs on it. At the tip a feather was fastened. Only this he took. 

‘ His sister was sitting there, - amoodily, longing for her absent brother. 

“Now, sister,” he said, “suppose I go look for my brother!” he said; 
“And.when this thing ceases to sway as it hangs, then, ‘Now it appears 
that my brother has gone to destruction,’ you will think,” he said, and 
pent out of the tent, after setting his quiver a-swinging by a push of his 

and. 

It kept swaying as it hung. He went away. He held the saskatoon 
stick in his hand. As soon as he had left, he went with great speed. Then 
really, he reached his elder brother, where he lay dead. He stroked him, 
like this, with that feather, with that stick of his. 

“Brother, arise!’ he said-to him. . 

He arose. So he really came back to life, when he had been stroked 
with the stick. He went with his elder brother. He went there. 

When he arrived, “‘Now then, elder brother, tomorrow do you come 

'. here,” he told him. 


214 


' “Very well,” the other answered him. 

Then he went-toward where that Lousy One was, and there from over 
the hill came the young women. . 

“Hey! Stand still where you are!” they said to him; “The one who 
outdistances the other, her you will take to wife,” he was told. 

They ran toward him. Neither was left behind; at the same time 
both reached him. . 

“Now let us go to our dwelling!” they said to him. 

So they went there. There, when they entered, that little girl again 


- “Yooked as she had looked before. 


“Hey, what are you going about seeking, like this?” 

“Oh, the fact is, I am looking for 2 woman to marry,” he said. 

“Then marry this one here!”’ 

He looked at her. 

“She is too lousy,” be said of her. 

“Oho, my children, it must be you he has in mind for himself You 
take him to husband!” she said of him. 

Then, when night came, he lay down to sleep. That little girl walked 
in her sleep. . 

“Greatly I am longing to work! Much I am longing to work! It seems 


. as if some lazy person has come here to stay as son-in-law!” said the little 


girl. 
“ In the morning at once he went off. Very quickly he came to where 
his elder brother had found and killed the bear. He walked to the spot. 

“Grandfather, I have come to fetch you, for 1 am engaging in a con- 
test this day!’ he said‘ to’ it. 

“Yes, my grandchild! But first do you take two hairs from round my 
mouth. To be sure, I do not think you lacking in power of your own. 
Your elder brother was deceived ‘by an unfair stroke. Now, as soon as 
you have brought me there, she. will send for her dog, who is an instrument 
of her power,” it told him; and so, “Very well, come now!” it told him. 

He clubbed it; he killed it. He dragged his burden home. Very 
early in the morning he arrived with it. As soon as he entered, he threw 
one of those things into the fire; one he kept on his person. 

Then, when the game had been skinned for her, “My children, go get 
my ax, my hide-scraper, my stick for treating hides, my pounding-stone, 
my thongs for stretching hides, as many as are my tools. And you, my | 
daughter, go round and look for my son, your dder brother,” she told 
them; and then, finally, “Now, do you call my dog," she told one of her 
daughters; “For I do not forget that he said, ‘She is too lousy!’ ” 

_ For she had been angered by the speech; that was why she was send- 
ing for her son. Then, when that dog arrived, the youth threw himself 
toward the door. The bearskin had not even been stretched, when the dog 
arrived. Then, when it came into the tent, though no harm had been done 
to it, it had its tail between its legs, and cringed as it came, just as though 
it feared something. - 

Then He Who Had -the Saskatoon Stick spoke of it thus; thus he 
spoke of that dog: “Is it on this creature that you rely?” he said of that 
dog, and teuched it with the stick. 


That dog broke into bits; it crumbled into tiny bits of metal. 


4 


215 


And of those things that lay there in a pile, “Is it on these things that 
you rely?” he asked her, and-touched her tools one after another with 
the stick. When then, one after another, they fell to pieces, that little 
girl had nothing left her; all the things on which she relied had been 
destroyed. 

“Well, now I shall hunt your lice. If I find one, then I shall be per- 
mitted to take your daughters home with me,” he said to her. 

“Very well,” said the little girl. 

When he looked at her, all over her face were lice; then, at the very 
moment when she sought to Jower her head, already her head had been 
touched with the stick; her lice had no time to disappear. " Without 
mercy he smashed the lice against the stony ground with his long stick. 
After a while he turned her head to the other side; wherever he looked, 
it was full of lice. Then suddenly some lice came and settled on Him Who 
Had the Saskatoop,Stick. At that he pointed his stick toward the blazing 
fire. A flame leaped up on the stick, and the lice that had settled on him 
were there on the stick, roasting until their bellies burst with a pop. While 
he was doing all this, in time that young man arrived, and at once saw to 
his surprise,how his mother’s lice were being hunted down. 

“Hey, on what errand were you off, while your brother-in-law here 
was destreying my tools to the very last one?” she called to him. 


; - - The son wore a little flute round his neck; the flute was tied with a 


small hide thong with the fur turned out; and a small piece of iron he 
wore across his shoulder. 

Then, ‘Why, mother, too greatly are you wasting your lice. It 
happens that even if we are not defeated, you are to give them up: For I 
have been called here to be present at the blessing of mortal man, that I 
too may give him mystic knowledge; and that is why I was so slow about 


_ coming home. ' You have gone too far in your evil. pursuits, mother, ” 


her son said to her.' 

He was.a pot-bellied child and went naked; Pot-Belly Child was he; 
he was Lousy One’s son. 

“Now then, brother-in-law, now is my turn!” he said. 

Then the lice ceased coming down. Then he took the little thong 
with the fur on it. Then he arrived who had been killed by the dog. 

“Ho, elder brother, stay far behind my back!” 

_ He flung the thing like this. 

mati you catch this on the fly, you have won it from mel” he told him. 

Though he tried to hit it in the air with his stick, in the form it had 
taken of a white butterfly, yet from moment to moment he could not see 
it, and then 4gain, suddenly right close there it would be in the air. 

“He will surely defeat me!” he thought. 

Then presently he rubbed the white part of his stick; it was white. 
As the thing flew past, he held it in front of it. There the ‘butterfly clung 
to it. He took it into his hand. He took the thing, now lifeless; he laid 
it down carelessly. 

“Now try thi?” the other said to him. 

He untied the little piece of iron; over yonder Pot-Belly Child threw 
it; it was a huge round block of iron. 
“y. “If you can handle this, you have won it from me! he told him. 

1 


216 


Then, when he tried to move it from the spot, he coyld not budge it. 
Presently, as he grew tired, as he looked at that stick, he saw that it turned 
green. He touched it with his hand; he placed it against every part of 
his hand. He took hold of the iron bar; at once he lifted it up, as though 
it were light. 7 

“Ha, brother-in-law, but now we shall come to grips, and we shall 
call to us whatever beings are to’be on our side. Whichever of us is beaten 
shall lose the instruments of his power.— Mother, are al] your implements 
gone?” ; 

“No. There are still those instruments of levitation upon which you 
-may stand,” she told her son. 

“Now then, do you first call those who are to be on your side!’’ 

Pot-Belly Child blew his whistle; with his call he brought in great 
number all manner of beings from the earth. And He Who Had the 
Saskatoon Stick pointed in every direction all over the ground. Then, 
when they counted their supporters, it turned out that He Who Had the 
Saskatoon Stick was by one follower ahead. Of the spiders that dwell 
under the ground, a white one of them was the odd one. Then he and his 
brother-in-law contended, as those things on which they stood stretched 
up into the air. ; 

Then, at this time, that quiver off yonder began to sway greatly. 
And yonder woman thought, ‘Now, it appears, my brother is contending! 
However, by all means he has spirit power; all manner of mystic knowledge 
has been communicated to him,” she thought. a 

» Presently, “Mother, he is about to defeat_me:~ Have you used it all, 
up?” es 

“Tam not yet weary,” said the little-girl; Lousy One. 

“Then bring me what you have! Let me stand on it.” 

“Tt is not of that kind, my son!” she said. a, 

They were aloft now at the height of the trees, when the Lousy One 
took one of the hairs from here, on her body. With it she struck that 
stick. It could no longer grow in length. . : 

Then that thing off yonder barely swayed a bit as it hung. 

“Hey, as first I dreamt, spider, everywhere in the sky and on the .. 
earth, your strings would be tied about!” he cried. 

He was now being close pressed. He fled about, and was pursued. 
And that woman off yonder had a stone mallet encased in leather and a 
small pestle-stone. She struck them. With them she beat something. 
At last, when, like iron, it widened out, she stood ‘on it. 

‘‘As first I dreamt, through the air he is to fly, and to take me hence, 
he who presses close upon my brother! It was the like of him, after all, 
that gave me mystic knowledge! And let it be with my husband’s war- 
club that I strike this being on which I stand, that it may speed fast through 
the air!” she spoke. . 

She beat it. , : 

“There where is my brother’s stick, thither take me!” she said. 

She sped through the air, * * * * * #* * * # * # # 

“Hey, Lousy-Woman! Do not forget that I love my brother whom 
Pot-Belly is tiring!” she cried. : . 
* * -* # —% *. *  * with it she beat those porcupine quills. 
Pot-Belly Child fell to the ground, and so did those quills. 


217 a 

“Ho, brother-in-law, you have won from me my implements. ‘Again 
some time you will be engaging in s contest. These, my mother's lice-y: 
will have for your use, and also these things, the iron and the other, Re 
the warm weather comes on, well on into summer, that is when you will 
be contending.”’ , 

Thereupon they went home. They came to where they dwelt. 

‘‘Ha, now he is more of a manitou than ever!’’ thought He Who Had 
Carried the Old Woman on His Back. 


Then, when summer came and it was almost time for his brother-in- 


law to arrive, then at one time, as they moved camp and were stopping for - 


the night, there came into sight a very lean man carrying a stick to which 
at intervals covered-up bundles were tied; they were surprised that this 
person, too, carried a stick. ° 

Then, as he came to where they were; “Come in!’ they said to him. 

Thén, “Why, what is this? ‘Whence do you come?” the elder brother 
asked him. . 

“From the willow-wood.” 

“But whence?” 

“From the willow-wood, I say!” 

“And what are you seeking, as you go about?” ‘ 


ry 


“T have come to take a wife. Which of ‘the women sitting here is . 
your sister? For your brother-in-law ‘leads you ¢ too much of a chase, , 


_ always going away.’ 

“You cannot have her to wife.” 

“My younger sisters have come with me and are staying close by here, - 
80 you may marry them in return.” 

They did not accept this offer. 

“Then we shall have to settle it by a contest!” said the lean one. 

“Very well, you first!”’ he was told who had the lice. 

He merely fixed his thought on the idea that lice were to,come down. 

They came down and settled on the lean man. He pointed the stick which 
he was carrying toward the blazing fire, and the! lice burned up, all the 
different evil animals, such as worms and toads, which he had as lice. So 
when they had been almost all destroyed, he quit. -Then he tried the 
string with fur on it.’ At once he moved his stick like this, and there, the 
thing clung to it. Then he threw the piece of iron over yonder; at once 
the lean man took it up into one of his hands and rubbed it; when he 
.threw it back yonder, it was small again. Then they summoned those 
who were to be their followers. It turned out that he who had surprised 
_them by ‘also having a saskatoon stick had one follower more, a white 
worm of those that stay under the ground. 

Then, just as he was thinking, “And so I must flee; we must flee!” 
suddenly from the west came the call, “Hey, brother-in-law, make room! 

Let go your sticks! I am coming!” 


Then something came a-flying with noise, and down fell the little — 


bundles that were tied fast to that stick. It fell to the ground. And that 
stick stood upright in the ground again, when he arrived, none other than 
that awkward man, who wore his garments with the fur turned out. 

“In time to come, mortal man will take up this root. ‘Medicine,’ he 
will call it, with which my brother-in-law has blessed him in the hither 
course of time. And this which my brother-in-law has here, mortal man 


. \. 


218 


will call ‘saskatoon willow,’ and with it will preserve his life. Now then, 
go home, my brother-in-law. Go to the land of mortals. Do not act wan- 
tonly. Do-not kill,” his brother-in-law said to him; ‘‘And as for you, who 
have come. here to engage in contest, go to the wooded country of the 
north. And let your sisters set out toward the-south. For you are ever 
too eager to engage in contests, now that it has been arranged that the 
earth is to be good, so that man may be plentiful upon earth,’ he said; 


“And as for me, I shall return here to the ground. All mortal men shall: 


take pity on me and of my wife. And you, my brother-in-law, the long- 
tailed mice, of these you shall be. And I, those whom men call ‘sharp- 
nosed mice,’ such a one I shall be!’ . 

He threw himself down; he turned into a mouse, and so did his wife; 
they were very tiny. 


That is the end of the sacred story. 


(23) Thunderbird and Winter 


Mrs. Maggie Achenam 
ka-wihkaskusahk. ; ; 


ékwah kutak. . 

kitahtawé dsah notukdsiw utanisah wikimiw. dkunik uyah néhiyawak. 
dkwah nohtahkatéwak, ukiniyah pikoh dh-mawatsihayit utdnisah, nipihk 
Gh~pakasimayit, dyékunth piko ch-méwatsik ; wi-npahahkatusowak. 


Kitahtawé sipwéhtéw uskinikiskwéw, ukiniyah dh-ppa-mawatsihat, 


ké-wapamat ch-minahuyit. ituhiéw. namuy adhpoh wih-kitapamik.  sésk- 
dis kahkiyaw wiydsah Osthtayiwah. sipwiahtdyiwah dkwah. wiya kutak 
dsahkindw watdwah, d-wih-muwaét. kiwiw, dkwah dyakunih okinisah 
tsimdpohkdw, mitsimapuy dyakd ah-mitsitsik, dyaku pikuh. 
| ékwah Gh-wdpahk sipwéhtéw ; minah sipwéhtiw. dsa minah mustus- 
woh nipahéw napdéw. mituni kisindw. uskinikiskwéw dh-papamuhtdt, 
iniyah éh-papd-mosahkinat, ituhtdw ohit napdwah. 

“kimikwaskamén dh-nunahuhk,” itéw napdw awa; “ manisawah 
w iyikuhk.”? 


6 


“! namuya, ” ttdw. 
‘dkust makah kah-wikimitin., ”~ 
‘\tsdskwa pitah,” itéw; “nikawiy pitah nka-wihtamawaw. tépdyt- 
mutsi,\ka-wikimitin. wapahki ka-wthtamdtn. ” 
“ dha’ ,” ttwiw napdw ; “ nimiywdythtin. ” 
_. Ekust sipwahtaw. akwah éh-waépahk, notukasiw utanisah kakwdtsimik. 
| “ nka-wikiméw dyokd napéw,” itik. ; sy a 


‘For wiyah? 


219 
“ dha’ ,” ttwéw notukdsiw. ‘ 

ékwah sipwéhtéw uskinikiskwéw ; wapamdw napdéwah. 

“dkwah kiwth-wihtamdtin : ‘dha’ ,’ itwdw nikdwiy ta-wikimitan.” 

kiwéhtahéw napdwah, takuhtdwak wikiwéhk. undpdmiw. _ tahtu- 
kistkéw minahuyiwa. dkwah é-kéh-kisupwdyik, kimwdtstw uskinikiskwdw. 

“ tanis mah d-kamwdtistyan ?” idw Gwikimdkanah. 

“kdkats dkwah mdnah ké-takuhtat niwikimakan,” itwéw uskinikisk- 
wiw. 

“dkwah népéw awa dh-undpdmiyan dtsik anih |” itiw; “ kth-kis- 
kdyihtamdén, namuya kah-wikimitin. tdnis, dsindkwahk kisik, wah-takusth- 
kth kiwitkimakan !” itéw uskinikiskwaéwah. 

“kispin wah-takusihki, wapaskwaw ; usdwipdskwdw. dyaku niwiki- 
makan, kisiwék pé-aydtsth. kisiwak dékwah, kistwak pdy-aydw. tapas ; 


ka-nipahik. ” 


dkwah naépdw, “ namuya ; otah nik-dyan.” 
kdtahtawd kdséw pihtsaythk nipdw. pé-misi-kitowak. 
“ dydké niwikimakan,” t’wdw uskinikiskwdw. 
kisiwak pé-pontsiniyiwah ; pd-pthiukayiwa. 
“ waniskah, nikusdk [" itik naipdw awa. 
Gékwah waniskaw. 
. “ ka-mdétawandnaw, ” itik. . 
“dha’; kiya nikdn. tdnist t-dsi-mdtawdyahk ? Fiya mikan, ” ttaw 
awah piydsiw. 
kw anih kah-kitow. misi-kimiwan ; miskwamiyf’ ‘pahkisin. isin. dkwah 
awah népéw kwdskémiw. asim ay-apiw, ch-ati-misi-kimiwaniyik, misk- 
wamiy minah éh-pahkisihk. kdtahtawd poyéw ; pdé-pihtukdw. 
“ kiyaskuts dkwah, nikusdk ; pimutah,”’ tléw uskusdkah. 
. “dha’,” dtwéiw; “ dkwah ta-misi-kisindw 1” itwdw ; “ mituni ta- 
wasdskwan ; ta-wdsdéskwani-kisin 1" ° 
mistaht kisindw. dkwah misi-piwan ; mtuni yoten, mistsikusak ah- 
pah-pakatsitsik. mitunt wih-kawateryiwa ukusdkah asdm. 
“ dkuyikuhk, nikusdék | kiwinaw wiwih kiydm,” ttéw. 
Gkust kisipwdéw kdwi mitunih. 
“ Kkiyam kiwinaw wiwih ; kisdkétsthin, ’ itwdw. 
dkust wiy G6k6 pdyak minah nikisihtan dtaydhkéwin. 


Now another story. 


Once upon a time an old woman dwelt with her daughter. They were -- 
Cree. They suffered hunger, for the woman’s daughter merely gathered ; ‘, 


thornberries, which-she boiled; and that was all they had to eat; they — 
were almost dead of hunger. 
Then at one time the young woman went off to go about gathering 


“ ‘« thornberries, when she saw someone who had killed game. She went 


near. That person would not even look at here Quickly he prepared all - 
the meat. Then he went away. But she, the other, picked up the clots 
of blood to eat. She went home. Then she made a broth of the poor 
thornberries, and this broth they ate, only this. 

On the next day she went out again. Again that man killed a buffalo. 
It was very cold. The young woman, as she went about, picking thorn- 
berries here and there, went to where that man was. 


4 i. 
. 7s 


220 


“You have come just in time to where game has been killed,” the man 
said to her; ‘‘Cut off for yourself as much as you please.” © 


The young woman: was pleased. 
“Now my mother will eat much meat!” she thought. 
At once he gave her one buffalo. She went home; she took home 


- the meat entire. When she arrived at her home, they had a big meal. 


The old woman was glad. 


er 


“Go out,again; perhaps you will see him again making a killing.” 


ane g 


; : 


She went. She saw him killing a buffalo. Again he gave her the 


entire carcass. She was pleased. 
And then, “‘Are you married?” 5 
“No,” she answered him. /; - \ 
“Then let me marry you, 
“Only wait,” she told 

content, I will marry yoy Tomorrow I will tell you.” Beate 

“Very well,”’ said tie man; “I am very glad.” 

Then she departed. On the next day the old woman’s daughter asked 


her. ; 
“Let me this man,” she asked her. 

“Yes,” said the old woman. 
Then the young woman went; she saw the man.- : 
‘“‘Now-I shall tell you: ‘Yes,’ says my mother; € may marry you.” 
She brought the man home with her. They arrived at the lodge. She 


had~him as her husband. Every day he killed game. But when the 


weather was hot, the young woman became listless. 
“Why are you so listless?” he asked his wife. 


_. “Because this is the time, always, wher my husband is about to come,” 
said the young woman. ; 


“And so you mean to say you have a husband, this man!” he said to 


-her; “If I had known that, I should not have married you. How looks 


. the sky when your husband is about to come?” he asked the young woman. 


_~ “When he is about to come, there is white sky; and yellow clouds are 
in the sky. That is when my husband has come near on his hither way. 


_ And close now, close has he come. Flee; he will kill you.” 


Then the-man, “No; here I shall stay.” 


Presently the man hid indoors. There came a great thunderstorm. 

“That is my husband,” ‘said the young woman. 

Close by the other came to earth; he came into the lodge. 

“Get up, my fellow-husband!” he said to that man. 

Then he got up. : 

‘We shall have a contest,” the other said to him.’ . 

“Very well; you first. What sort of contest shall we have? You 
first,” the Thunderer was told. 

Then he roared. There came a great rainstorm; it hailed. Then that 
man changed his form. A snowshoe lay there during the great.storm of 
rain and hail. Presently he ceased; he came inside the lodge. 


“Your turn now, my fellow-husband; shoot your arrow,” he told his 
fellow-husband. a 


“Very well,” said he; “Now let there be intense cold!” he spoke; 


“Let there be very clear sky; let there be a clear cold sky!” 


im; “Let me first tell my mother. ‘If'ghie.is” 


221 


It grew very cold. And there was a great flurry of snow; there was a 

strong wind, until the branches snapped and crackled in the cold, The 
Snowshoe’s rival husband froze almost to death. 

: “Enough, my fellow-hushand!. Keep you our wife, as you please,” he 
told him. 

Thereupon the weather again grew very hot. + ae 

“Keep you our wife, as you please; you have defeated me,” he said 

And 80 now I have finished this story too. 


B 


(24) The Ten Brothers 7 : 
: Coming-Day 
khd-kisikéw-pihtukdw. a, 

iskwiwak dyoké: mitdtaht iskwdwak, piydsiwak, iskwdwak, dkwah 
ohtdwiyiwawa minah ukdwiyiwawa 6k iskwawak, th-ukimdwiyit shtawiyi- 
wawa. 

dkwah étah, askthk utah, dkutah uskinikiwak mina mitdtaht, min dyak~ — 
unik uvitisanihiutsik, mika nam dwiya ukdwiwdwa ; Ghtawiwdwah minah 
nam dwiya. dkust péyak piku mikiwahp ; nam awiya kutakah ayisiyiniwah 
aydyiwah kistwak. 
. akwah oki tapimihk iskwdwak, itéh k-ayatsik, misiw btinaw dwaku, 
dyukunrik okt iskwéwak, piyak umisimaw matsihkihkwiwis isiyihkasow. 
dkusi awa usimimdw, aw bskinikiskwiw miyusiw. 

dkidsi dwah kutakak- ok sskinikiwak mitdtaht k-thtasitsik, dwaku . 
ustisimdw matsthkiwis ; kdydpits aw bsimimiw, aw dskinikiw miyustw,. ° 
dkusi uskinikiwak oki namuya kiskdyimiwak iskwiwe ninitaw kit-dydyit, 
minah kyutakah aytsiyiniwah, pdyakwanuhk dy-aydtstk 6k oéskinikiwak, 
pisisik mdtsiwak kahkiyaw ok dskinikiwak. kitahtawd Gma ch-mdlsitsik 
mana, dka dwiyah ch-apiyit, aw oskinikiw usimimaw dyaku manah nikdn 
_takusin. dhust kahkiyaw néh-ndway takusinwak. 

kitahtawd dh-takuhtét aw dskinikiw, kd-wapahtahk mistah dy-astdyikth 
mihtah, tapiskots awiya d-kih-takuhtdytt, itdythtam, dh-takuhldt. mastahi 
miywiyihtam, “ maskéts awiyak pihtsayihk tit-apiw,"* é-layihtahk. 

ah-pihtukét, nam awiyah wdpamdéw, dkusi -wayawtw,ta-papamuhtit, 
ka-wapahtahk itah dsah- d-kih-pimuhlaytt iskwéwan... -dkwah mitihtiw itéh 
th-kih-nikuhtdyit ; nam Gwiya wadpamdw, kawih kiwiiw ; piltukdw, dkwah 
ah-kutawét, é-wih-paminawasut. “éh-kisi-kutawdt, uhtopiwinihk. ah-apit- 
kttahtawé "kakway kd-kiskdyihtahk ttamihk ifjcustiiyilih ulanaskéneliheg 
dkusi dh~-pdskinahk, kd-wapahtahk maskisinah. ~wlinam, éh-wd-wapahtatik ; 
| mistahi miywasiniyiwah. miywdyihtam ; nahastaw. . 

umis ttwiw: “iskwéw adtsik anih ka-kih-takuhlat 1” ttdythtam ; 
“ namuya ta-wapahtamwak nistésak,”’ itdyihtam. 

éh-kutsih~pustiskahk, potih miyuskam. dkusi dkwah heutakah ustisah - 
ka-tah-takuhtéyit, piyisk kahkiydw takuhidyiwah ustisah ; mikah namuya - 
wi-wihtamawaw, . 
. dkust minah é-kth-nipitsik, ih-wapahk, ktkisipa sipwihtaw Gw uskint- 
kiw, dh-mdtsit, kutakak minah Gsk-dskaw sipwihtdwak, namuya mana éh- 
witsdhtulsik ok dskintkiwak ka-mateitssk, kahkiyaw ch-pi-péyakutsik, 
miydatsitwawi. 
- Be—15 


222. 


dkusi dkwah aw Gskinikiw, “ maskits d-wih-wikimit awa iskwdw kda- 
kih-takusihk, ’ itdyihtam. , , 

uéh ch-nipahadt mustuswah, dkwah uldyaniy, dkwah itah ch-miywasini- 
yik wiyds, dkwah pdyak upiminak, dwaku ulinam, dkwah umdw, éh-kiwit. 

“ maskots takuhldtsih ana iskwiw, te-mitsiw Gmah umdw; minah ta- 
pastaham um updminak, ta-mitsit,” dy-itdyihtahk, kiwdw. 

dkwah kistskihtéw, d-wih-koakwé-kdstskawdt uskinikiskwdwah, dy-itdyth- 
tahk. potith ch-utdkusiniyth, dh-takuhtdt, dsay minah mihtah wapahtam 
mthtsdt Gh-astéyikih. wipahtam éh-pikihtayik wikiwaw. 

“maskots apiw,” itdythtam. 

Gh-pihtukit, nam dwiyah wapamdw, dsah kah-wdpdstakahikdyit! 
miywiythtam. dkwah ponam, d-wih-paminawasut. . dkwah dh-apit, dh- 
paminawasul, dsay mina kikway itdythtam ituh kd-kiy-astiyikih maskisinah. 
Gh-utinahk, min dyakunth maskisinah. dsay mina miywdyihtam, dh-wa- 
wapahtahk. mistahi miywdsiniyiwa, éh-pimikildyikih. dkusi astaw, “ nam- 
uya ta-waipahtamwak nistisak,” dh-itdyihtahk. dkwah, oki uskinikiwak ah- 
tah-takuhtdtsik, wipahtamwak mihtah mihtsdt. miywdyihtamwak, “ tapwd 
kiyipah mistahi nikuhtéw,” éh-itéyimatsik ustmiwawa. ' 

awah ustisimdw, dwaku matsihkiwis, umis twdw 1 “ tapwd nimiy- 
wayihtin mihtah mistahi dh-astikih,” itwdw. . 

“ éha’ ,” ttwiwak uskinikiwak. 

dkusi namuya wih-wihtam aw uskinikiw. dkust-dkwah tipiskayiw 
mina, d-kih~mitsieutsik, “Gh-ay-apitetk, kuntah dh-Gh-Gteimutsik, piyisk 
kawistmuwak, 8 

“haw, kiyipah™nika-waniskan,” itéyihtam aw uskinikiw; “ nika- 
sipwahtin kiyipah,”’ ah-ildyihtahk. ; 

lapudw kiyipoh waniskaw, d-wih-matst, tapwé,d-kih-mitsieut, wawiyiw, 
ch-matst. mitunih miywdythtam. an oo 

“ maskits d-vih-wikimit away iskwiw kd-takusthk,”’ itéyihtam. 

Gkust itd dh-nipahdt mustuewah, dkwah utinam itah d-miywasiniyik 
unyds. Gkwah dh-kiwdt, pah-pimipahtaw, “maskots nika-wépamaw,” 
Gh-itéyihtahk, tsikt éh-ihtat wikiwahk, ké-wdpahtahk mistah dh-pikihtdyik 
wikivdw. d-takuhtét, ‘mistahi wapahtam mihtah dh-astiyik. dh-pithtukdt, 
nam auiya wapamdw, dsah mitunth kah-wipahtakahikdyit, minah utan- 
Gskdnivdwa -dsah dh-pahpawahamiyit; min dsah kah-paminawasuyit 
astiyiva. sbskwudis mitmsow. deay mina kd-wapahtahk kékway dh-astdyikih. 
du-utinahk, dsay minah maskisinah, mtuni miywéyihtam. 

“haw, namuya nka-wihtamawdwak_nistdsak, ”’ itdyihtam. 

potih ch-utakusihk, ké-tah-takuhtdyit ustésah. - Dc 

dkwah umis ttwiw aw, ustisimaw: “ tépwd kikiyipin, mihtah ah- 
ulinamun,”’ itéiw uxima, . 

“ cha’ , ayish kiytpah nikth-takusinin, ” itaw. - 

dkust kutakak min, oki d-lih-mitsisutsik, dkusi atih-tipiskdyiw. dkwah 
ay-apiwak, dh-dtsimutsik, Omak ka-kth-mdtsitiik dwaku dh-dtsimutsik, Gh 
pa-pithpitstk. ” . 

“ dkust minah wipats nka-sipwihtan,” itéyihtam aw éskinikiw. 

_kiyipah kawisimow, dkusi kahkiyaw kawisimowak,. dh-nipatsik./ 
potih kiyipah waniskiaw aw uskinikiw, dh-paminawasut. dkusi kahkiya - 
waniskdwak, dkwah dh-mitsisutsik, mayaw uh-kisi-milsisutsik, wawdyiw, 


1 Error, for kd-wdpahtakahikayit, or a different word? 


~ F 


iy 


47 
f 


223 


Gh-mdlsit aw uskintkiw. dh-kih-stpwdhtdt, alkeuyikeuhe kahkiyaw sipwaéh- 
tdwak, dh-mdlsitsik. itdh dh-minahut\aw usimimadw, mistaht wiyds kiwéh- 
tataw, kiytpah d-wth-kakwd-takuhtét wikiwdhk. tapwd tsik dy-ihtat, wapah- 
tam mistah dh-pikthtdyik wikiwiw ; adkwah tipwd mistahi wapahtam mih- 
tah, dh-ati-takuhtdt wikiwahk, kd-matwdé-kituwéhtdyit pihtsdyihk awiyah. 
dh-pihtukit, dh-nandtawdpit, kd-wapamdt iskwéwah, potih mitunt 
miywdsiniyiwa ulandskdniyiwa dh~pdtayit. .miywdyihtam dh-nahapistawat. 
sdmdk umaskisinah kah-kétikunamiyiwa, kutakah éh-pustaskisinahikut, 
dh-itikut, “tépwd mitunt yahkith kikaskdyihtin, d-wih-wdpamiyin, .d-kis- 
kdyihtaman tah d-kth-nakatamdn ta-kikaskisindyan, ” éh-itikut. 

“dha,” itwiw awuh uskinikiw; umisi itwédw: “ ayisk namuya 
kiyipah kitakuhtén, kayds dh-takuhtéyin ta-ki-kisdtaman sdmdk,” itdw ; 
“ kuntah kekth-kah-kiwan, " dtdw. 

“ Gyisk, ‘pitah ntaw-dh-atuski,’ dy-tsit nodhtawiy,” a&kust itwéw aw 
Oskinikiskwdéw. . 

dkust dkwah milsisowak.  Gh-kisi-mitsisutetk, kd-takuhtdtsik oki kuta- 
kak uskinikiwak, piyihtukdtwawi, wiydpamdtwawi oh Sskinikiskwéwah, 
mistahi miywiyihtamwak. nandskumowak dh-dwitimulsik. aw dstdsimaw 
matsihkiwis ndway takusin. dh-pihtukdt, dh-wapamat ohiy iskwdwa, mis- 
taht nandskuméow. : 

“hay hay 1” dtwéw; “dkwah, dkdé dkwah kd-kaskikwdatisoyahk |”? 
uwdw. 

dkust miywdyihtamwak. dkutd tahtu-kisikaw mdtsiwak. 

umis twdw aw iskwiw: “ haw, nitimutik, kd-nipahdydkuk mustuswak, 
mistaht pétaék wiyds. mina askdkinwah aké wiya waépinamuk ; dkwah 
nama kikway kik-bmaskisinindwaw,” itdw aw iskwiw. - 

“ dha’ ,”? itwdwak ok Gskinikiwak. 

miydtsitwéwi, ah-iyawis pdsiwéwak, Omah wiyas. miywdythiam ow 
Oskinikishwiw dh-atuskdt, pahkdkinwah dy-usthtdt, mina kdéhkéwakwah 
Gh-nimawinthkat, pryrsk kahkiyaw Ohi népdwah umaskisiniyiwa ch-usihtat, 
piyis minah ulayswinistyiwa dh-usthtat pahkékinwa uhtsth, maka mikisah 
ah-kikamuhdt utdsiyihk minah uskutdkaythk. mistahi miywdyihtamwak ok 
éskinitkiwak, tyikuhk dh-pamthikutsik witiméwdwah. mistahi itimakdy- 
miwak Gh tskwdwah. mistahi atuskdw aw iskwdw. ; 

dkwah kinwdsk Gh-ayét awa iskwiw, kitahtawé awah matsihkiwis 
akdwatiw Ghih uskinikiskwiwah. kiskdyihtam aw uskinihiskwdw Gh-itdyth- 
tamiyit Ghi witimwah, piyis kinwdsk aydw dkutah. 

dkwah kahkiyaw dh-mdtsitsik, matsihkiwis awa kd-téi{pdwat itah 
mana dh-nikuhtéyit witimwa, Omési dh-itdyihtahk: “ rk-Owitsimusin 
nitim,” dy-itdythtah, dkutah d-kdgohiawdt. 

. &kwoh awa aw iskwdw ch-ntawi-nikuhtat, _ ka-oapamat witimwa dhe 
pdw-utihtikut. 

“ hdw, nitim, miywayimin po itwitw matsihkvis, 

“ kimiywdyimitin, & Mtwdw, aw iskwaw ; “maka k-dtdyihtaman wiy 
dwaku nisdkwéyimun ; usim nisakihaw kisim,” itéw. 

mis ttwdw awah awah matsihkiwis : hd, nitim, payakwaw pikuh 
ka-witsdtin. itép namuya ka-wthtamawaw nisim, "1 itaw. 

_ § nisdkwdyimun, nitim,” itik 6h iskwdéwah. 
FL 80185~154 


oe 224° 


~ déku3t nawatindw, d-mdasthdl, d-wih-kakwd-kawipitat. namuya sakuhdw 
\. 6h iskwdwah. ° plyisk pimwiw uskdtiythk, “‘ nka-sdkuhaw," dh~itdyihtahk. 
, maka namuya sikuhiw. piyisk dkus ist pinihdw, dh-sipwdhtdt, dh-mdtsit. .. 
dkust awah iskwdw dkutah uhisi sipwihtéw, dh-kiwdt, dh-ndpdwistt, 
witimwah Omah dh-titakut. hdta namuya d-sdkuhikut, maka népdwistw ; 
ak ohtst k-6-sipwahtat. a st a 

_dkwah 6k éskinikiwak, dh-takuhtdt awa wiyiwit, potih dstawiyiw wiki- 

wadw. namuya waépamdw uwikimdkanah. . 


tah dsah dh-ati-pimuhléyit dwikimdkanah, ch-stpwdhtdyit. mihkuh dh-at- 
ah-astiytk, ma-mitihtaw. piyisk néhtaw tpiskdyiw. dkus ist kiwdw, ah- ' 
* takuhtdt wikiwahk. dkwah kutawdw, dh-ay-amit. mistahi mihtdtéw uwiki- 
makanah, d-nakatikut. piyisk takuhtdwak kahkiyaw uskinikiwak ; namuyd 
takuhtiw awah matsthkiwis. uskinikiwak namuya wipamdwak shi witimu- 


wawd, . 
émis ttiw : “-nisim, tiniwd nilim ?” itwiwak. . 
” “namuya. nikiskéyimadw,” ttwiw aw oskinikiw; “ kaydhid dh-takuh- 


ldydn,-namuy dpiw; dkwah déh-ntunawak, namuya nimiskawdw. dkwah ~ 
‘ ttéh khd-nikuhtét mana nitituhidn ; poétth niwdpahtdn dsah dhutah d-kih- 
-. .takuhtdt kstdsinaw, dsah kah-mdsihai witimwa. piyisk. niwdpahtin ksté- 
sinaw uwipisis dh-asldyik. ma-mihkéwiw. dkusi dsa kd-sipwihtdl kitimu- — - 
waw. nikih-mitihtadw ; mihkuh at-dh-astiw, itah dh-pimuhtél, piyisk ka- 
pa-kiwiyan, " itwiw awa uskinikiw. | - 
o “ héhihdy !” itwéwak 6k dskinikiwak ; “ maka min disik adnih dkah 
katawah tiydtahk kistésinaw ‘1 itwdwak. . 
mihtdtamwak d-sipwahtdyit oh iskwdwah. dkwah apiwak ; namuya 
wih-mitsisbwak, d-sipwéhtiyit dhiskwiwa. mistahi dh-tipishadyik, dkuyikuhk 
kd-takuhtdt awa matsihkiwis. ° éh-pihtukdt, wapamdw dh-kdmwdlapiyit 
_ kahkiyaw ustmah, ; : 
“ nisim, tandhki Ghd k-oh-apit nitim ?” ttwdw. 
“d, tanthk dtukd ? maskots nanitaw dh-ituhtat,” itwaw aw uskinikiw. 
‘““Ghahdy héhe !” itwéiw matsihkiwis ; wista mihtdtam, tapiskots. aka 
nanitaw dh-kih-totahk ; ayisk muhts6wiw awa matsihkiwis. 
piyisk namuya nipdwak, éh-mthtatdtsik ohiskwdwa. piyisk wapaniyiw. 
wawdyiw aw uskinikiw, , : 
: ; “Gh haw, nistasitik, niwih-nitunawaw Mtimuwaw,” itwdw. 
ie . “dha,” ttwiwak uskinikiwak,  - * ; 7 
d dkust dkwah sipwihtéw 6w uskinikiw, dh-mitihtat uwikimakanah, 
dh-pimuhidt. dkwah oki uskinikiwak -pdyakwanuhk apiwak ; namuya 
wih-matsiwak, dh-pakwdtahkik. d-sipwaéhtdyit oh iskwdwah, dh-mihtatdtsrk. 
dkwah aw dskinikiw kd-ma-mitihtat uwikimakanah, piyisk namuya wapah- 
tam’ itah Gh-pimuhldyit dsa; tdpiskéts dh-uhpihayit itdyihtam. potih 
dkutah nipawiw, dh-nandtawapit. tdnitah , ta-kihatuhtéyit wwikimakanah 
namuya kiskdythtam. nitawdts utinam. umistanipiwaydn, dh-potatahh. 
“hdw, tantéh niwikimakan dh-ituhtdt, akutd nik-dtasin | nik-omis- 
tanipiwaydniwin |” itwdw. 
lapwd ispimihk itasiw. - kitahtawd kd-wdpahtahk dh-asiniwatsiwiyik. 
dkutd tahkuhtsdyihk ka-pondsit. - dkusi dkiutah ah-pagikét, kd-wapahtahk 


» : 
~ 4 


| 225 


{ 
‘| 

| ‘ 
ttah dsah é-kih-pimuhtayit| uwikimakanah. dkwah dh-mitihtat, dy-ispatin- 
dyik déh-ati-takuhtayit, d-sdkawat, kd-wapahtahk d-misdyik dtinaw. wdp- 
amdw d-mthisdtiytt ayisiyiniwah. dkutah nahapiw. piyisk kinwiis dkutah 
apiw, d-ka-kitaépahtahk Ghi mikiwahpah. Iitahtawdé kd-pdtsdstamuhtayit 
iskwéwah, kistwak éh-pdy-thtdyit, kd-nisitawdyimdt uwikimdkana. mis- 
taht miywdyihtam dh-pd-takuhtiyit. 

simak ulsimik, “tépwdé nimiywdyihlén dh-takuhldyin,”’ dh-itikut ; 
“ aytsk kakdpdtisiw kistas, k-oh-pd-sipwahtiydn, ” itik. ‘ 

““ tanist dh-lotdsk nistés ? ” dtwdw, 

“anima ka-mdtsiyik, ‘d-ntawih-nikuhléydn, dkutah ka-pa-takuhtat 
kistds, umis dy-isit : ‘ dh-miywdyimitdn,’ dy-isit. ‘ nistah kiniywiyimitn, ’ 
nititiw ; ‘mdka k-dtdythtaman namuya wiy dwaku ta-kih-dkusispayiw, ’ 
mititaw. ‘pdyakwaw tépiydh ka-witsdtin,’ nitik ; ‘itap namuya ta-kis- 
kdyihtam nisim,’ ttwiw. ‘nisdkwiyimun,’ dhatak, ka-pdw-utihtinit, 
dh-masthit, mdka namuya niki-sdkuhik. piyisk dkah d-kih-sdkuhit, ka-' 
pimut tah nipwamthk. dkusi aspin d-stpwdéhtdt. dkusit d-kih-utinamdn 
anima atsusis ; dkutah aspin ntastén. ‘ nisdkiha niwikimakan, kd-népd- 
_ wihit nitim,’ nildyihtén, nitsawats ka-pd-kiwdydn, ” itwdyiwa, 

“ haw, adh-pd-ndtitan, ” ittk. 

dkust dkwah kiwiwak. dh-takuhtitstk mikiwahpihk, miywayihtamiyi- 
wah Gh dyistyintwa, polth qihldyisk GhUsimatdyik dh-misdytk mikiwahp, 
dGkutah kd-takuhtdtstk, dh-pihtukdtsth, kd-wapamdt uskinikiskwdwa_ d- 
mihtsdtiyit, 

“ddty 1” itwayiwah ; “ kitimunaw takusin |’ k-dtwdyit, éh-nahapit. 

dkwah ah-dlamiskak, 

umist itwiw awa kisdyiniw: “ dhdhdy !" thwiw ; “ dyisk, ninahahk- 
tsim, kakdpdtisiw kistds, ohih kd-titawdt witimwa, oh-péh-kakwatakihtayin, 
dh-pdy-ituhtdyin,” itwéiw; “ haw, Gh-kitimakasiyak, Gkéh awiyak Gh- 
pamilikuydk, kd-kth-ttisahwak nitdnis, ‘ntawi-pamis 6k oskinikiwak,’ 
Gh-itak, ka@-kih-ttuhidt, kd-kakdpatisit kistis,” ttwiw awa hisdyiniw ; ; 

“ maka miniywayihian d-lakusiniyan, ” tlwdw. 

dkutah ay-aydw aw uskinikiw, kdtahtawd manah sipwoihtaro, ispatin- 
aGhk mana dh-ay-apil, d-ka-hitdpahtahk mikiwahpah. ptyis mana takuh- 
tdyiwa uuikimakanah dhuté ispatindhk. piyis kaskdyihtam, ustésah aké 
h-wadpamdt, usm kinwés dkutéih dh-aydt. . 

kitahtawé kunitah d-sa-sipwahtdt, Mtahtawd ké-wapahtahk, itah éGh- 
pasahisdéyih, d-sakdytk, dkutah kd-wdpahtahk mahkitsiwanipak, ah-miy~ 
wdsiniyik asiskiy, tapiskdls wiyaman k-dsindkwaniyik, ulinam, éh-miy- 
wiyihtahk, uskutakahk dh-Gh-ayisthtital, dkwah ustikwanthk, tapiskals Gh- 
tomihkwdt dhaldyihiahk. dkus ist, Gh-kiwdt. dh-takuhlét wikiwahk, Gh- 
pihtukdt, d-kitépamikut ohiskwéwah witimwah, tsimak ka-pahpiyit, “mnd 1” 
Gh-itikul, ‘' mdémaskdis awa iyikuhk ush-mihkowiw, éh~piyasth-minahut 1” 
k-dtikut. 

* hay hay hay !"' itwaéw awa kisdyiniw. 

amis itwiw bw uskinikiw: “ namuya kékway ninipohdw, ” ttwdw. 

“nah, dh-minahuyan, 6ma mistahi ké-mihkowiyan |” ittk wiwa. 

dkusi utinamiyiwa nipiy, d-kisipékinamiyit um uskutdkay minah 
ustikwan. 

“ mamaskdts awa iyikuhk d-wih-mihkuwit 1” itwdyiwa. 

dleusi k-Gti-wayawit awa kisdyiniw. 

. AS 


226 


“ haw, haw, nitoskintkimitik, wawéyik | nikwatisutdn ! ninahahkisim 
nipchéw unitsiniwa d-witsiwdyit utsawdsimisiyiwa |” itwiw awa kisdy- 
iniw. ; . 

dkust wawdytwak. 

“ haw, nitinis, ta-kiskinohiahiwéw ninahéhkisim, ” itwéw. 

dkust aw uskinikiw Omis ttwiw: “ namuya kdkway. ninipahéw,” 
ttdw uwikimdkana. . . 

“Ggmah,” itik, “ ténitah dy-Ghtinaman, omah ‘asiskiy’ k-dtwdyin, 
dkutah k-dtuhtéyin?” itik uwikimadkana ; “ ayistyintwak tstw uma Gh- 
itayimiyahk ?” k-étikut uwikimdkana. . 

“dha’ ,” itwdw aw uskinikiw. : 

“ namuya,” itik uwikimdkanah ; “ kiyawaw Gtih nihtsdyih k-Gydydk 
bmisi: ‘ piyésiwak,’ k-dtwéyék, niydén dkutowa,” itik; ‘“ awa ka-nipahat 
k-dlikawtyan, ‘ misi-kinépik,’ k-dtwiydk, dkutowa. itah Gh-aydt 6m dsiskiy 
ka-pétéyan, umthkuh niydn nititwénan,” itik uwikimakana. ) 

Gkusi dkwah sipwéhtéwak, dhuté ch-ituhtahat oh dyisiyiniwah. kahki- 
yaw wilsiwiw uwitimwah. ; 

d-lakuhtétstk dkutd, 6misi itwiyiwa usisah : “ haw, nitén, ninahahkisim 
kanawiyim, akah ta-sikihikut shih ka-wiw-utinayit uminahéwina,” it- 
wéyiwa. : 

.  Gkust uwikimakana utintk, tapiskots dh-apisisisit, dkus d-totikut, 
utthkokantythk dkutah éh=ahikut. 

Gkuythuhk, “ dkwah namuy ayistyiniwak 1" itéyihtam, kahkiyaw dh- 
papamihdyit ; “dkwah piydsiwak 1" uwikimdkanah mina, éh-misi-kimi- 
wantytk, mistah dh-kitiyit piydsiwa, tépiskots kakway dah-pdskisamiytt, 
mistah dh-na-namipayiyik askiy, dh-itiyihtahk.  dh-pini-pdéhiakusiyit, 
dkwah dh-utinikut 6wikimadkanah, kaé-wipamat d-misikitiyit kindpikwah 
dkwah payak Gh-dpisisisiyit. mdmaskdtam itah dy-bhtindyit muhkitsiwani- 
pikuhk, d-kth-wdpamat. 

“niténis, kiwéhtah ninahadhkisim,” itwédw awa kisdyiniw; “ ka- 
pakudtam, kinwdsk kitépamdatsth oki kinépikwah,” dh-itdyihtahk awa 
kisdyiniw. 

dkust kiwdhtahéw uwikimakanah aw iskwdw, aspin éh-wiyinihtakdyit. 
dkust wiyawaw wikiwahk takuhtéwak.. minisah mitsisowak uwikimdkana. 
Kitahtawé kd-takuhtaéyit, dkwah éh-pétayit wiyds, iléyihtam. 

“hd, nldnis, spatinadhk ntawih-ay-apik,” itwéw awa kisdyiniw, Smisi 
Gh-itdythtahk ; “ kisitépuwthkih, wih-mitsisuwihtsth, ta~pakwatam ninahah- 
kisim,” Gh-itdyihtahk ; ayisk ohi misi-kindpikwah d-wih-mowatsik, dyuk 
uhist k-bhitat unahahkisima. 

piyisk kinwdsk dkuté ayaw aw uskinikiw, piydstwah éh-witedwat. 

dkwah 6mis itwiw awa kisdyiniw : “ nitdnis, dkwah kiwdk. ninahah- 
kisim mistaht kitimakisiyiwa ustésah, ch-kaskdyihtamiyit, ékad aéh-wapami- 
kut. usdém kinwds otih ayaw. kikth-ttikunaw kd-tipéyimikuyahk, aka 
in-dyistyiniwa ta-wilsdwayahk otih ispimihk,” itwéw awa'‘kisdyiniw. 

‘miyudythtam aw uskinikiw. 

“hah, wapahkih ka-kiwananaw. ”’ 

“ hahdw, nitawasimisitik, wawdyik ; kiyawaw mina ntawih-wikimihkuk 
kitimuwaw ustdsah, dh-isih-askowiskutatoydk, ka-witséwawdawak,” itwdw. 

mistaht miywéyihtam d-uith-niawih-undpdmit awa matsihkihkwdwis 
matsthkiwisah, kunta tahkih dh-pahpit, “ pitand kiyipah wapahk 1” Gh- 
ildyihtahk matsthkihkwéwis, d-nohté~undpdmit. dkust dkwah ch-tipiskayik, 


& 


ok 227 


ah-kih-nipdtsik; éh-wapaniyik, &-kih-mitsisulsik, dkwah sipwihtdwak. awa 
matsthkihkwéwis mituni éh-miywdsiniyik uskutakay, kunt d-sdwdpayiytk, 
mitun dh-miyuhut. itah ch-asiwatdlsik utayowinisiwawa umaskisiniwdwa,! 
dkunith tahkunamwak, d-stpwéhtdtsik. piyis takuhtéwak om tah ka-kih-. 
uhtsi-pimuhtat aw uskinikiw. namwils wapahtam askiy, nihtsayihk ch- 
itadpit.. dkutah nipawiwak. oo 
“haw, niwikimakan,” itik, “ dstam 1” 
~ dh-nahikdpawistawat, utinik, tapiskots ch-Gpisisisit Gh-totakut, utth- 


«! 


-.bGkaniythkh gkutdh éh-ahikut, ké-péhtawdt ch-kd-kitoyit piydsiwoh. dyak- 
urak. ok oskinikiskwdwak, dkwah dy-uhpihatsik, éh-pimpahtsi-pahtakusitsik, 


pipdsiwak. gAyisk nthisdyihk takusinwak. -itah ka-wikitsik uskinikiwak, 
tstk dkutah déh-twahutsik, kdwi ayistyiniwiwak ok iskwéwak. dkusi dkwaoh 
ah-pimuhtdtsik, mistaht -miywdythtam aw uskinikiw, “ dkwah nistdsak tsit- 
dyawawak iskwdwah, ? dh-tdythtahk. 

dkust éh-pimuhtétsik, kdkdts dh-takuhtdtstk, Gmis itwiw aw uskinikiw : 
“G6tah pita aydk; wawdsik; timthkwik. nka-nitawih-dtsimustawdwak 
nistisak,’’ éh-tat ch iskwéwah ; \ itap ka-pd-wihtamatinawaw,” itéw. 

dkust dh-ati-sipwahtit, wawdsiwak 6k iskwiwak. awa matshkihk- 
wdwis mistaht wawdésiw. awah uskinikiw dh-takuhtat wikiwahk, potih nam 
dwiyah itéythtam. dh-pihtukdt, kahkiyaw ustiésah kd-pimisiniytt. 

“ wantskak, nistésitik ; nitakusinin 1” itdw. 

dw-uhpiskwdyit awa matsihkiwis, ké-wapamat usima dh-apiyit. 


aw “waniskak, nisimitik ; kisiminaw takusin 1” ttwiw. 


lapwd waniskiwak, éh-wapamdtsik usimiwdwa. mistaht nandskumé- 
wak. ‘* mdskoéts kth-misi-wandtisiw, ” d-kih-atéyimdatstk usimiwdwa, namuya 
uhisth néndpdtsthiwak. 

“hd, nstdsitth, kdsthkwak ; kih-kdsthkwdydku, néndpdtethuhkdk ; wa- 
wdsthkak ; iskwiwak nipdstwdwak, oyd kitimuwdw witstsdnisah. uma 
k-dhtastyahk, dku-tahtuh thtastwak iskwdwak. d-ts-6ma-askéwiskutadléyahk, 
dkusi ktk-dsi-nahapistaékowdwak pihtukétwawi, ’? ctviw. 

hd, mistaht miywdythtam awa matsthkiwis, iskwdwah d-wih-aydwdt. 
Gh-kisi-ndnapdtsihuytt, kd-wayawit aw uskinikiw, dh-niawth-nitémat oh 
iskwdawah. : 

Gh-utthtat, “ tdpwd nama mayaw kitakuhtin, ” ittk uwikimakana. 

_ “Ghd , ayisk nistéisak utamth-ndnépadtsthowak. aspin kd-sipwéh-- 
téyan, dkuspi uhtsth payakwanuhk dh-apitsik, namuya ndndpétsihowak, 
‘ mdskéts misi-wandtsihow,’ d-kth-itdyimitsik, dkad mayaw dh-waipamitsik, ” 
tliw uwikimdkanah ; “ haw, nitim,” tldw 6h bmisimdwa, “ bli skwahtimihk 
uhtapiw nistds; dku kiya kd-wih-witsiwat. ndway Iayah kika-pihtukan, 
kahktyaw pihtukdtwawi Gkih kistmak. dkéya mayaw yihtukdhkan. dkutah 
wayawilimihk ‘pah-pimuhidhkan. ‘ta-kakwd-ihkdyihtam nistds,” itwdw 6 
uskintkiw. ~ 

“Gha’ ,” itwéw matsihkihkwdwis. 

ce hd@w ! ” 

dkwah sipwihtdwak, tahk dh-pahpit awa matsihkihkwéwis, dh-miy- 
wdyihtahk d-wih-undpdmit. dkwah 6k Gskinikiwak éh-apitsik, matsihkiwie 
awa tahk d&h-paspdgit, kitahtawd ka-pdtisapamat, pdyak kd-wapamdat ch- 
miyusiyit dkwah éh-miyuhuyit. piyisk takuhtdyiwa, kd-pdhtahkik d-sdéwd- 
payiyit awiyah. ; 


_ 1 Narrator avoids the word astwatsikan. 


Se \ 


228 


é-pihtukdyit usimimawa, é-nahapiyit, ké-pd-pihtukdyit witimuwaw. 

“hay hay hay hay 1” ttvdwak uskinikiwak, d-nisitawdyimatsik witimu- 
wawa. dkutah dkwah kutakah ka-pihtukéyit, awa uskinikiw teik-osimimiw 
d-nahayistakut. dkutah uhtsi dskaw pihtukdyiwah, ch-ati-nahapistakutsik. 
piyisk kahkiyaw pihtukéwak. awa pikuh matsihkihkwiwis namuya .wih- 
pihtukéw. dkwah awa matsthkiwis Gh-dyiwakipayit, tahk Gh-itapit iskwah- 
timihk, ch-asawdpamdt, ta-pihtukdyit iskwéwah mdtwd-dhtuhtiyitsth ki- 
sdwdpaytyit. piyisk pihtukdyiwa. wahwi, miyuhuyiwa ! Gh-nahapistakul 
matsthkiuis, mistahi miywdythtam. kahkiyaw dkwah aydwdéwak iskwawah, 
kuntah éh-pé-pikiskwdtstk, éh-Gtsimutsik, dh~pahpitsik. ; 

hitahtawd umisi k-dtwat matsthkiwis : “ yaw, nisimitik, tan um dtap- 
iyak ? -kinahéhkapihtinaw !” ttwéw. 

utinam kaskaskisiw, d-sikwatahahk, éh-tomthkwdt, dkw d-kaskitéwik- 
anakdjnt otah uskisikuhk. utinam upakamdkan, Gh-ati-wayawit, utah kisi- 
wak dh-piskwahtsdyik, Gkutah éh-pa-pakamahikét ; kuntah kd-matwé-ma- 
mauimuwit wakayosah, nipahéw. kiwdéhtahdw ; pihtukahéw. 

“hdw, dyakw dnah, niwikimadkan ! Gmis dtukd kiwth-ay-ttahteikan 
dtukd, éh-téyihtaman, k-ch-pd-wikimiyin, ” itwitw matsihkiwia. 

“hay hay! tapwé nimiywiyihtin wakayos é-vih-méwak,” itwéw 
matshkihkwiwis. i ; 

dkust Gh-wiyinihtakat dkwah éh~pakdsimdt wikayjsa, kahkiyaw déyak- 
unik ah-mowalstk. dkwah ch-kth-mitsisutsik, dkuyikuhk tipiskayiw, a-kih- 
nipatsck, ” 

Gkwah tahtu-kisikaw mdtstwak, ah-pdldtsik wiyds. mistahi ka-kay- 
auisiwak ckhiskudwak. mistah ch-atuskdlstk, kiyipah wikiwawa kisthtawak ; 
kahkiyaw dkuwah pah~payakukdéwak. dyisk mititastwak iskwdwak ; mita- 
taht usihlawak wikiwawa. dGkusi aepin dh-wa-wikitsth. , 


dkuyikuhk éh-iskwék dtayohkawin, 


This is about some women: ten women, Thunderer-Women, and their 
father and mother; and their father was a chief, ° 

And here on earth were also ten youths, who, in the same way, were 
brothers, but these had no mother; and they had no father. So they had 
only one tent; no other people dwelt near there. 

And up above, where those women dwelt, that was a large town. 
Among those women, the oldest of the sisters was called Silly Maiden. ° 
And the youngest was a pretty maid. 

And likewise, among those others, those ten young men, the oldest 
was Matchihkiwis; and, again, the youngest brother was a handsome 
youth. Now, those young men did not know that theré were anywhere 
any women, or any other people at all. Those youths stayed always in 
that one place, and.all of them did nothing but hunt. Then, as time went on, 
and they hunted,.and none of them stayed at home, then that youngest 
brother was alway3*the first to get home. After hirn they would all come, 
one after the other, 

Once upon a time, when that youth came home, he saw a great amount 
of firewood lying there. Exactly as if someone had come there it seemed 
to'him, as he approached. He was very glad, thinking, “Perhaps there 
will be someone within.” ; 


229 


* | When he went inside, he saw no one. So he went out and walked 


round the place, and there he saw that a woman must have gone by. Then 
he followed her tracks to where she had gathered wood; he saw no one. He 
went back again; he went indoors and built his fire, to cook the meal. 
When he had madc his fire and was sitting on his couch, soon he knew that 
there were some things ‘under his mat. When he uncovered them, he 
beheld sorme moccasins. He took them and looked at them; they were 
very pretty. He was glad; he put them carefully away. 

He said, “And so a woman has come here!” he thought; “My brothers 
had better not sce them,” he thought. 

When he tried them’ on, why, they fitted him well. And then his 
brothers began to arrive, one after the other, until all of them had come; 
but he did not ‘care® tell them about it. * 

Then, when they had slept, on the next day, early in the morning 
that youth went out to hunt. The others, too, one after the other at 
intervals, set out, for those young men did not keep each other company 
when they hunted, but did their hunting each by himself. - 

' Then that youth thought, “Perhaps it is because she wants to marry 
me that this woman has come here.” * 

Where he killed a buffalo, he took the tongue, and the best part of 
the flesh, and one thigh-bone, and the smallest stomach, and went home. 

“Perhaps, if that woman comes, she will eat this stomach; and she 
will split this thigh-bone and eat it,’ he thought, as he went home. 

He walked fast, thinking to come upon the young woman while she was 
there. Then, towards evening, when he arrived, again he saw a great — 


- amount of firewood lying there. He saw smoke rising from their tipi. 


“Perhaps she is there,” he thought. 

When, he enteréd, he saw no one, but it was plain that someone had 
swept. He was glad. Then he fed his fire, to couk their meal. Then, 
as he sat there while cooking, it seemed to him that again there was some- 
thing where the moccasins had been. When he took it out, this too was a 
pair of moccasins. Again he was glad, as he looked at them. They wer¢ 
véty pretty, embroidered with quill-work. He put them away, thinking, 


“My brothers had better not see them.” Then, when those young men’. 
‘arrived, one after the other, they saw a great amount of firewood. They’. 


were glad to think of their young brother, ‘Truly, in a short time he gathers 
a great deal of wood.” . 

The: oldest. one, Matchihkiwis, said, ‘“Truly 1 am glad that there is 
#0 much firewood.” © 

- “Yes, indeed,” said the young men. . 

Then that youth did not care to tell what had happened.: Then it 
grew dark again. When they had eaten, and had gat a while, telling all 
kinds of stories, they went:to bed. . 

“Now then, I shall get up early,” thought that youth; “TI shall set 
out early,” was his thought. 

So he got up early,.to go hunting. When he had eaten, he made ready _ 
to go hunting. He was very happy. . 

“Perhaps it is because she wants to marry me that ‘Re woman has 


come here,” he thought. 


So then, where he killed a buffalo, he took the best parts of the meat. 
When he went home, he kept running, for he thought, “Perhaps I shall 


a 


230 
see her.’ When he had got close to. their tipi, he saw that much smoke 
was rising from it. When he arrived, he saw that much firewood lay there. 
When he entered, he saw no one, though it was plain that someone had 
swept the place clean, and had brushed out their mats; and there was a 
meal which she must have cooked. He ate right away. When again he 
saw some things lying there, and took them up, again it was moccasins. 
He was very glad. 

“Now, I shall not tell my brothers about it,” he thought. 

Toward evening his brothers arrived, one after the other. 

Then the oldest brother said, “Really,.you are very quick about 
getting faggots,” he said to his brother. ‘ 

“Yes, for, you see, I got home early,” he told him. 


Then, by the time the others had’ eaten their meal, it was getting 
dark, Then they sat there a while, telling stories, telling about the hunt- 


ing they had done, and Jaughing. _— 

“This time, too, I shall set out early,” thought that youth. 

Quickly he went to béd. Then they all went to bed and slept. That 
youth got up early, and cooked his food. Then they all arose and ate. 
As soon as they had eaten, that youth made ready to go hunting. When 

“he had departed, then they all went out to hunt. From where he killed 
his game, the youngest brother took home a great deal of meat, and he 
meant to try to get home quickly. And truly, when he got near, he saw 
much smoke rising from their tipi; and truly, he saw much firewood. 
When, he went on and approached the tent, there was someone noisily 
carrying on within. ' ; 

When he-entered, as he looked about, there he saw a woman. Lo, 
very’ beautiful were her mats which she had brought. He was happy to 
go and sit by her. 

__ At onee she took off his moccasins and put others on his feet, and 
said torhim,“‘Truly, you were very sad, of late, with longing to see me, 
when you knew that I had left those moccasins here for you to wear.” 

. “Yes,” said the youth; ‘‘For‘indeed, not promptly have you come, 
seeing that you might have stayed at once, when long ago you arrived,” 

. he told her; “Needlessly you have been going back and forth,” he told her. 

“It was because my father toldime, ‘First go there several times to 
work’,” said that young woman. . ; 

Then they ate their meal. When they had eaten, then, when those 
other young men arrived, as they entered and saw that young woman, they 
were very glad. They gave thanks that they had a sister-in-law. That 
oldest brother, Matchihkiwis, came last. When he entered and saw the 
woman, he was delighted. 


h arn !” he said; ‘So now we won’t have to sew for ourselves!’ 
e said. ‘ 
So they were happy. Then every day they went hunting. - 
Thus spoke that woman:-“‘Now, my brothers-in-law, when you kill 
buffalo, bring home much meat, And do not throw away the hides; other- 
Wise you will have nothing for moccasins,” she told them. 
“Very well,” said the young men. _ 
When they hunted, they always brought the animals entire, for meat. 
The young-woman was happy at her work, preparing leather, and making 


v 


_ a ee oo 
"stores of dried meat, and in time making moccasins for all thase men, and 
clothes out of the hides, and, what was more, putting beadwork on their leg- 


‘ gings and their coats. Those young men were very glad to have their 


sister-in-law take such good care of them. They were very fond of the’ 
woman. She worked very hard. : 


i Os Se ee} 


Ce ee Time passed; she had been there a long while. 

Then, when all were hunting, Matchihkiwis went circling about the 
place where his sister-in-law was wont to gather firewood, and this was 
his thought: . 2... 1 ee ee ee he 
thought, as he hid from her there. . 

Then, when that woman went to gather faggots, there she saw her 
husband’s brother coming toward her. 
was why she went away. 

Then, as for those young men, when, he came home whose wife she 
was, lo, their tent was without a fire. He did not see his wife. 

“T wonder why she is not here?’”’ he thought. . 

When he looked for her, he could not find her. At last he went to, 
where she used to gather faggots. . . . . 1... ee ee 

So ek ee and then he saw his brother's arrow lying 
there, covered with blood, and he saw where his wife had walked, as she 
went away. He followed her trail where the blood at intervals was.on the 
ground. At last it grew dark before he had done. So he went back and 
came to their dwelling. Then he built a fire and stayed there. He grieved 
much for his wife, who had left him. Finally all the young men arrived; 
only Matchihkiwis did not arrive. The young men did not see their 
brother’s wife. . 

k One said to him, “Brother, where is my sister-in-law?” Thus. they 
aske 


home, she was not here; and when I sought her, I did not find her. Then 


“J do not know,” said that youth; ‘To my surprise, when I came ; 


I went to where she is in the habit of gathering wood; there 1 saw that - 


our oldest brother had come ..... ee 
At last I saw an arrow of our brother’s lying there. It was covered with 
blood. Then, it appeared, your sister-in-law had gone away. I trailed 
her; there was blood every little ways, where she had walked, but at 
last I came home,” said that youth. 

“Heavens and earth!” said those young men; “And Bo again our 
eldest brother has been guilty of unseemly conduct!” they said. 

They were sorry that that woman had gone away. -They sat there; 
they did not care to eat, because that woman had gone away. When it 
-was entirely dark, then Matchihkiwis arrived. When he came in, he saw 
that all his brothers were sitting in dejection. 

“Brother, why is my sister-in-law not here?” he asked.. ; 

“I wonder why. Perhaps she has gone somewhere or other,” said 
that youth. 

“Heavens and earth!” cried Matchihkiwis; he was too sorry, just as 
though he had had nothing to do with it; for. this Matchihkiwis was a 
crazy sort of person. 


Lo 


Pe sy . 
meg 


+ 


~ 232 


When the time came, they did not sleep, what with their grief for that 
woman. At last day broke. That youth made himself ready. 

“So now, brothers, I am going to look for your sister-in-law,” he said: 

“Yes,” said the young men. 

” So then that youth set out to track his wife, and walked on. And the 

other young men stayed where they were; they did not care to hunt, for 
they were grieved that that woman had gone away and were sad at her 
absence. But that youth who was tracking his wife, at last came to a point 
where he could ‘not see the signs of where she had walked; it seemed to 
him just as if she had risen from the ground and taken wing. He stood 
there and looked about him. He did not know where his wife had gone. 
Knowing no other way, he took a hair of fur and blew upon it. 

“Now, whithersoever my wife is bound, thither shall I be.wafted! I 
shall be a hair of fur!’’ he said. 


And truly, he was borne aloft by the wind. Presently he saw where 
there was a rocky cliff. There, at the summit, he was put down by the 
breeze. Thereupon, when he rose to his feet, he saw again where his wife 
had walked. Then, when he trailed her, and came to a rise in the land, as 
he came round to the other side, there he beheld a large town. He saw 
many people. There he sat down. He sat there for a long time, looking 
at all the tipis. Presently a woman came walking his way. When she had 
come nearer, he recognized his wife. He was very happy when she came. 

At once she kissed him, and, ‘Truly, I am glad that you have come,” 
she said to him; ‘You must know, it is because your eldest brother is 
senseless that I went away and ha¥e come here,” she told him. . 

“What did my eldest brother do to you?” he asked. : ; 

“At that time, when you_were hunting, and I was going out to gather 
wood, to that place came your brothéf, and saidtome,. ....... - 

. + .. Then, off he went. So then I drew 
out that arrow; I laid it there, as I went away. ‘I love my husband,’ was 
my thought, ‘but his brother has put me to shame,’ and so I needs came 
back here,” she said. : 

“And now, I have come to get you,” she told him.- 

Then they went to her home. When they reached the tipi, those 
people were glad. It was a large tipi which stood in the centre of all, to 
which the) came, and, when they entered, there he saw a great many, . 
young women. . : ‘ 

“Why!” they cried;, “Our brother-in-law has come!” they cried, as he 
took his seat. 

Then they all-greeted him. 


‘Thus spoke that old man: “Dear me!” he said; “Surely, your oldest 
brother is foolish to have treated his sister-in-law in this wise, so that 
you had to suffer much hardship in coming here,” he said; “See, becatise 
you were pitiable, having no one to care for you, was why I sent my daughter 
there, saying to her, ‘Go take care of those young men,’ and so she went, 
and then your brother played the fool,” said the old man; “But I am 
glad -you have come to us,” he said. ; 

There stayed that youth. Then, in time, he would go away aid sit 
on a hilltop and look at all the tipis. After & while his wife would come to 
him there on the hilltop. At last_he grew ‘sad, Deeause he did not see his 


Q 


brothers, having been there so long.. 


4 233 


Then at one time, when he went off at random, he came to a wooded. 
ravine and there saw a spring, and some good. clay which looked exactly 


like vermilion. He took some, because he liked it, and placed it/+here and 
“~ theré on his coat, and on his head, thinking to himself that it.,was just as 


rareu 
= 
ye 


* 


-you think we are human beings here?” she asked him. 


though, he were painting his face. In that guise he went hopfe. When he 
reached their dwelling, when he entered, and those worhen, his wife’s 
sisters, looked at him, at once they burst out laughing,-and “Goodness!” 
they said 40 him, “A strange sight, the way he gets bimself full of blood, . 
when he“has killed all the game he likes!” they saidto him. 
Splendid! Splendid!” exclaimed the old mans 
/ The youth said, “I have not killed any kind of creature.” 
“ “Why, surely it was in killing some game that you got yourself all 
full of blood like this!” his wife told him. ‘ 
Then she took some water and washed his coat for him and his head. 
“A strange sight, the way he gets himself covered with blood!’ she 


said, 


Then the old man went out of the tipi. 

“Come, come, my followers, make yourselves ready! Let us fetch 
meat from the killing! My son-in-law has killed a dam with her young!” 
cried the old man. ; ; 

At that they made ready. 

-“Come, daughter, let my. son-in-law show the way,’” he Said. 

Then that youth said, “I have not killed any kind-of creaturey’ he 
told his wife. - : 

' “But this,” she said to him, ‘where did you get it, this, which you 
call ‘clay,’ at the place to which you went?” his wife asked him; “Anddo 


‘“Yes,” said that youth. ey 
“No,” his wife told him; “When you who dwell there below, say 
‘Thunderers,’ even such are we,” she told him; ‘That creature which they 
tell you you have slain, when you say ‘Great Serpent,’ such it is. That 
clay which you have brought from where, it is, we call it that creature’s 
blood;-his wife told him. - | Bk 
‘ So then they set out, that mortaél.man leading them thither. All 
his wife’s sisters went: with him. ~ & 

When they got there, his father-in-law said, “Now, daughter, take 
care of my son-in-law, that he be not frightened by those who are about 
to take up the game he has ‘killed,” said he. . . ‘ 

Thereupon his wife picked him up;. as if he were but a small creature 
she handled him, and’ placed him under her arm. oo 

At that, “No, they are not mortals!” he thought, as they all began to 
fly about; “And so they are Thunderers!” as his wife joined them, and 
there came a great rain, and the Thunderers roared loud, as if they were 
shooting some object, and the earth trembled much, as it seemed to him. 
When they had ceased their noise, and his wife took him forth, there: he... 
saw a Great Serpent and a small one. It seemed strange to him that-they- 
had got those creatures from the spring, when’ he saw them. . 

“Daughter, take my son-in-law Home,” said the old man. “It will not 
agree with him to look too long at these serpents,’ was the old man’s 


thought. 


234 

. So that woman took her husband home, as the others began to cut up 
‘the kill. So they arrived at their dwelling. He and his wife ate berries. 
Presently the others arrived, bringing méat, as it seemed to him. — 

“Now, daughter, go you two, and stay on the hilltop,” said the old 
man, thinking, ‘‘When the cooking is being done, and when we eat our 
meal, it will be painful for my son-in-law,” for‘they were going to eat that 
Great Serpent; that was why he said this of his sox-inlaw. 

' For a long time, finally, that youth stayed there, with the Thunderers. 

Then thus spoke that old man: ‘Daughter, now:go home. My son- 
in-law’s brothers are very unhappy with grieving because they cannot see 
him. He is staying here-too long. He told us who is our Master, that we - 
are not to have mortal men for our companions here above,” said the old? 
man. _ ae ‘ 

The youth was glad. : 

“There, tomorrow we'shall go home.” 


‘The Silly Maiden was very glad that she was iso take to husband 


that Matchihkiwis; she kept laughing a foolish\Jaugh, and she thought, ~ , : 


that Silly Maiden, “T wish tomorrow would hurry up!” for she was.ecager | 
to have a husband. So then, when. night came, when they had slept, in 
“the morning, after they had eaten, they set out. Very-fine was Silly 
Maiden’s coat, jingling with bells all over, for she had put ob much finery. 
Those things into which they put their clothes and their moccasins, they 
carried in-their hands, as-they set out. In-time:t ey.came to the place 
from which that youth had walked. He could 1 not see the earth, when he 
looked down below. There they stood. ~ _” 

“Now then, my husband,” she said to him, “come here!” 

When he came and_stood close to her, she took him up, handling him 
as though he were-but a small creature, and placed him'under her. arm, 
and then he-héard the Thunderers’ repeated call. It was those young 
women,-who now rose and took wing, and as Thunderers went speeding _ 
on with noise. Soon they arrived below. Wheh cloge-to the dwelling place 
of those young men they landed from their flight, those women again took 
human form., Then they walked on. That youth-was very glad to think, 
“And now my brothers will have wives.” _ = 

‘Then as they walked along, when they had almost come -to their 
destination, that youth said, “Stay here.a while; deck yourselves out; 
paint your faces. I shall go'and tell my brothers,” he said to those women; — 
“I shall come back and tell you,” he said to them. | . 

So then, when he had gone on, those women put on their ornaments. 
That Silly Maiden decked herself out splendidly. When the youth reached 
their dwelling, at first he thought there was no one there. When he entered, 
there were all his brothers lying on their beds. 

‘‘Arise, brothers; I have come!” he said to them. . 

When Matchihkiwis raised his head, there he saw his brother. 

“Get up, brothers; our brother has come!” he cried. 

They arose, and saw their youngest brother. They were very thank- 
ful. Because they had thought of their brother, “Likely he has gone to his 
destruction,” for that reason they took no care of themselves. 

_, ‘Come, brothers, wash your faces; when you have washed your faces, 
tidy yourselves; put on your good clothes;.‘I am bringing women, the ~ 


235 


sisters of your sister-in-law who went away. .As many as you are, 80 many 


are the women. In the order of our ages they will take their seat by your, 


sides, when they enter,” he said 


Oh, very glad was Matchihkiwis that he was to Rave awoman. When 
they had groomed themselves, that youth went out to go call the women. 


When he came to where they were, “Truly, you are late in coming 
back,” his wife said to him. 

“Yes, for my brothers had: much to do, grooming themselves, “Ever 
since I went away, they have-been staying in ‘that one spot and have taken 
‘no care of their appearance,” ‘because, when they did not seé me in time, 
they thought of me, ‘No doubt he has’ gone to his destruction,’ ” he told his 
wife; “Now then, ‘sister-ini: ‘law;”’ he said to that eldest sister, “There by 
the door sits my oldest brother; he is the one with whom you will keep 
company. You will enter last, when all your sisters here have entered. Do 
not enter promptly. Walk track and forth outside the door. Let us try 
to make my eldest brother suffer from hope deferred, ” gaid that youth. 

“Very well,” said the, SilyMaiden. 

“Come!” 

Then they set out, Silly Maiden laughing all the while, glad that she 
‘was to have a hushand. And as those young men sat there, and Mat- 


chihkiwis kept peering out through the door, in time he saw them approach, - 


and one he saw who was beautiful and wore the finest clothes. At last 
they arrived, and they heard how some one of them jingled as she moved. 
When their youngest brother entered and took his seat, in came their 
sister-in-law: | 
“Splendid, splendid!” ried the young men, when they recognized their 
sister-in-law. And then another came in, and she took her seat by the side 
’ of the -youth. who was next to the youngest. After that they came in at 
’ short intervals, and each one sat down by a young man, At last they had 
‘all come in. Only that Silly Maiden would not come in., And so Mat- 
chihkiwis was left as the odd one, and he kept looking at the doorway, 
Jooking out for the woman to enter, who could be heard walking up and 
. down with her clothes a-jingling. At Jast shé came in. Hah, she was 
beautifully clad! When she sat down by Matchihkiwis’ side, he was 
delighted. So now all of them had wives, and they talked and talked and 
jabbered, and told stories, and laughed. 
Presently Matchihkiwis said, ‘“‘Why, brothers, why’ do you sit here 
like this? Do not forget we are’ newly married!” he said. - 
He took some chdércoal, ground it up, and paintec finsclf, blackening 
his face round.the ¢yes. He took his club and -wént olit of the tipi, and 
_ where, close by, t, there was a amall knoll in-the land, he knocked with his 


lub; then he ‘heard the growling of a-béar; he killed it. He took it. back ~ 


to the lodge with him; he brought it inside. an 
“Here; this is for you, my wife! 1 daregay you were looking forward 
to this kind of food when you decided to’ come here and marry nie,” said 


-Matchihkiwis. . 
“Qh, fine! “Truly, I am glad that Zam to eat bear’s meat,  gaid the 


Silly Maiden. 
/So then she cut up the bear and put it in the kettle, and they all ate 
of At. When they had eaten, it was: dark, and go they went to bed. « 


ky 


236 : : 


Then they hunted every day and brought home the ineat. Very 
industrious were those women. They worked hard and soon had made 
their tipis; so then they lived each in a separate tent. For there were ten 
women; they made ten tipis. And so they lived there from that time on. 

This is where the sacred story ends. 


(25) Burnt-Stick 


_ Louis Moosomin 


‘ { 


néh-namiskwikdpaw., 


\ kitahtawa yahkih mah-méstsithtaséw wihtikow, tapasiwak dsah mitataht 
uskinikiwak, dyitaw d-uhkwaékanit awa vihtikow, mihisdt diah mikiwdhpah 
ah-ihtakuhkih, dsa mana éh-mah-méstsihtal. 

mitdtaht dsa dy-thtasitaik oki uskintkiwak, “ tapoxitin [” itwdéwak dsa ; 
“ kiydnaw pikuh kik-dskwahikunaw,” itwéwak dea, 

lipud waudyiwak ; mikiwihp wéhyaw fpoabsthle nlauth-usthtdwak, 
’ Gkwah Klahtawi kiwiwak ; ndtéwak usimisipdwa. © ékutad nikwatis uviki- 
‘> wok. Ghuté,, Kitahtawad dh-wa-wikitsik, Kitahtawd naipdisis mana dh-kana- 
- wapukdt, kitthtawdasah éh-ponthk, ki-kisisihk. mistsikus wihkwatsipitam. 
7 bmah-mistsikus usitthk ka-kisisihk iskwahtdmihk déh-wdépinahk, ka-pih- 

x pihtukdlgtsimuyit iskwasisah. - 
sulindw dsah, “ misawdts namuya nika-lihuhpikihaw,” ch-itéyihtahl: 

Os. _ , 

dkwah ka-pa-pthtukdyit, dsay mina é-kih-wayawiwdpindt, dsay mina 
kihtwéim wayowiwdpindw. a . 

dkwah kihtwim éhpi-pihtukéyil, “ nistésdé 1!” k-dtikut daah, , 

“ah, mahti minah ! ahpoh dtuké kit-oskinikiskwiww, kihtwim way- 
autwipinakih 1" ttéyihtam dsah. dkwah Gmisil’ ttwiw: “ kita-vih- 
uskinikiskwiwiw, ahpoh dtukd dh-witsihikuwisiyan 1" itwiw dsah, 

. Gkwoh ka-pd-~pihtukiyit uskinikiskwiwa, “* ay-apih, nimisé 1” itwiw 
dha aa napdsis. : 

pihkahtiwahtik isiythkdléw dsah Ghi uskinikiskwiéwah. dkusi dkewoah 
miyudiyihtam ih-umisit ; minah dh-mihtsiliyit ustdsuh, miywdyihtam kita- 
pamihilutsik Ghi uskinikiskwawah. 

p Gkutah dsah maka mina wikihkimow wisahkdtedhk ohih uskinikiwah ; 
-.daku uhtsi, k-oh-kiskéyihtamiyil kit-dsih-tapasiyit ohih wihtikowa.  ayish 
oss th-mahpiniw wisahkétsdhk ; dwak Ghtsi kd-wisdmat Ghi uskinikiwah. 
- “ matsikah, nisimis 1” itwéw dsah. 
2 nikin dsah mang pihtukiéw owe wisahkdlsahk. . 

“lanisi kah-itéythtin,”-ituéw awa ndpdsis, “ uskinikiskwiw kit- 
dydwayahk ?” itwitw' sah, 

Gkwoh wiya wisahkdtsahk, “ kitk-osiminanaw 1" itwiw; kahkiyaw 

kékway kih-usimiw ayisk Gsah wisahkdtsahk. , 

" Kilahtawé dkwah mistahi kd-kdyawisiyiwa ahi usimiwdwa, dh-kaskik- 

vatikutsth, minuh é&h-paminawasuyit. mituni dsah kwayask pamihikwak, 

dkwuh mistahi wistawdw dsah éh-kitimakdyimatsik; dkwah éh-mah-matsit- 
sik, tsimak wipats dsah mina ch-atih-kisihtayit pahkdkinwah, dkwah mana | 
ulayowinisiwdwa dw-usihtayit, mitunt kwayask dsah éh-pamihikutsik—_- 

Kitahtawih bmisih ituéw dsah wisuhkdtsdhk : “ ah, deay kiskéyihtam 

tah Gh-aydyahk dyttaw k-chkwakanit wihtikow,” itwiw dsah; “ pikuh ae 


7 


237 
’ nika-kiwodtandn, ” itaw ; “ dkwah mina kdkway pihtamanth,’ kaya wih 
kits nadkatohkéh, nikuhlayani, ” daw dsah bhi uskintkiskwiéwah, mhkah-~ 


téwahtik k-dsiyihkasuyit ; dkwah dsah, “ dkdya wihkats, ‘wapahtamanth 
kdkway, ulin,’ idy dsah, “utinah. dkutah uhtst dkwah mina nika-kiwot- 


dnin. kékway mina puhtamanth, aka apiyahkuh, mistahi mamtoww- ke an 


dyitawthkwéakandt wihtikow. dkusi niya wiya yisahkdtsahk nikustaw,’ 
ttwdw deah wisahkdtsahk ; “ dkwah mina tapiskots niyanin kik-ilihtawinan, ” 
iwdw deah; “ tdnwd ndwu-tipiskaw nika-kiwotanan. milun ani kita- 
kisingw. dkwah ka-péhtawinan ; aka yohténamohkan,” ilaw dsah Ghih 
uskinikiskwdwah. } 
tanwd d-kih-kakdskimtht awa uskinikiskwdw, dkwah* mitsi-nikuhiaw, 
mayow kahkiyaw d-sipwahtdyit ohi ustésah. dkwah kahkiyaw mina! kisats 
néh-ndtwaham ; min dsoh kisdts kahkiyaw pihtukataw ; dkwah dsah mina 


kutak kiskatahwiw é-misikitiyit mitusah, dkwah sohkih mitunih ipaham 


' wikiwdw. mistah dsah kisindw.. 
dkwah kitahtawd kd-matwd-ttwéwiht : “ nistmis, nitakusinindn |” ka- 
matwih-itwiwiht dsah. ' . 
dkwah ayisk ke-hakdskimaw ; ; namuya dsah wih-waskawiw. piysk 
wdsakdm dkutah wikihk matwih-nipahatsiyiwa, waniskdw_kikisdpd ; dh- 
Gtah-wayawit, namwats ahpoh awiyah kita-matahat. mamaskdtam. 
“tapw dteik Gnih 1”? itdyihtam awa uskinikiskwéw. ; 
néiu-tipiskaw éh-kith-ispayik, takuhtiwak oki uskinikiwak. dkwah 


' mina kah-kapé-histk : ‘dh-nikuhtat piku awa uskinikiskwdw, nama wihkdts 


kdkway utinam, Gtah nandtuhk kdkway wiyadpahtahkih. kitahtawd dsa 
mistahth éh-~miyusiyit mékwanah wapamdw dsah. 

dkwah utingw, “ mdtukdtah éké kika-waydsihitih 1” letitikut, kayahia 
Gtah dy-uhtsi-pasikaytt Ohi wihttkéwa Gyitaw k-shkwakaniytt. 

omisth dsah itwiw awa wihtikiw > “ tapwd niwih-miyu-mitsisun, pihe 
kahtdwahtik d-urh-muwak | haw, mhkahtawahtik, pitah ka-kiwéhtahitin ; 
kikaswinowitin, Mar 
__, dkuat awa’ wihtikow nayiméiw dsa ahi- uskinikiskwawa. kiwéhiahdw, 
emistahi_dsu ch-kakwatakihat notukdsiwa ch-ajawit, tahtu-kisikaw Gh-kway- 
dtsi-pdkahtamdkut, dh-kwaydtsi-kisisamakul, tahtu-kisikdw Gsah-mdna nisu 
ayisiyiniwah uhtsth Gh-muwdl, dkwah mana ayisiyiniw utakisiyah, tékuhtdisih, 
pita,nikdn dyakunih dsah mana dh-mitsit. aoe 

dkhwoh, “ nohku,” itwéw Gsah eee _kikih-kwaydtsi-pakahtan “tt utak- 


isiyah ta-miteiyan ? mistahit Gkwah mujusiw uskinikiskwéw kd-pdsiwak, ta- . 


muwak. dGhkamdyimuh th-kakwd-wiyinuwat,” ttwdéw dsah: 
tdnwith, “ dha’ ,” itwéw dsah awah nétukdsiw. 


- 
maistahi miywiyimaw oht uskinikiskwéwa awa notukdsiw, pihkahtdwah- 


lik k-tistythkdsuyit. 
ékwah dasa 


“nésisd, tipwd mistah iydkwima ta-nipahitan nipak- 
wilin,” itwiw de; ‘ mahtih kiyam_kakwé-tsisih ; niya nipahin,” 
dsa awa nitukdw ;~Qakwah dkust kika~pakasimin, ” ttwiw dsa awa ‘notukdw. 
tipwd owa uskintlrokuygw miywiyihtam dy-itikut “Ohi notukdsiwa. , 
““tGnisi maka kd-tolamam™g-nipahitan ?” itwdw dsah awa uskinikisk- 


wiw. 
“ omisi, ? itwéw awa notukdw ; skahikan kik-Gtindn ; nistikwanthk 


ka~pakamahan, " itwéw awa nétukdw ; 
Gwa, dm otoh nistam usdhtsdw hik-Gmatsiwdn, dkutah, uhtst minah kutak 


8318015 - - 


“ aléh dkd ah-pesimowik néd usdtin~~ 


ttwdue 


238 . 


spatindw ka-tépapahtin. - nd6 ispatindwa miydskamant, dkutd kakwé- 
‘takwamohkan piwapisku-waskahikan. dwakunth dkutd ah-sdkutsihikut. 
kispin Gkuldé takwamuyani, dkust kika-pimdtisin,’? itik dsah ; “ takwaému- 
yant dkuld, Omisi itwéhkan: ‘ nistésd, niwih-nipahik dyitawihkwdkan 
wthitkéw 1! kik-dtwin, wdp anah kika-yohtinamakuk, " 

ldpwdé dh-kih-kakdskimikut awa pihkahidwahiik oht nétukdsiwah, 
pakamahwdw ustikwaniythk.. ékwah dkus ist wiyanthdw, d-kih-nipahde. 
pakdsimdw. dh-kih-hisiswat, dkus ist sohkth tapasiw., piminahtdw mitunt 
séhkih. kitahtawd tspatindw ntawdpahtahk, dh-alth-kapd-tipisk dh-pimip- 
ahtdt.’ dsay mina kutak ispatindw wapahtam ; dsay mina dwakuh miydskam. 
mina kutak ispatindw wapahtam ; dwaku mina miydskam. kutak spatindw 
Gh-dmatstwat, Gsay dkwah ké-matwd-tdpwatikut bhi wihtikowa. 

“namuya misawats kitah-pihisdw askiy kit-dlamuyan 1" ka-matwd- 
ist-tépwalikut, 

mistaht dsa kisiwésiw awa wihtikiw, dhkumah dh-muwat. dkwah ta- 
pinusiwdw ; kutak dw-usdihisayik éh-dmatsiwdl, dtah nithisdyihk kth-asldyiw 
piwapisku-waskahikan, ndwty Gh-itdpit, kih-pdlisipamdw dsah wihtikiwa ; 
séhkth dsah dkwah ténwd tapasiw, dh-ulihtahk, wani-kiskistw tdnist kd- 
kih-isi-kakdskimikut Ghi nétukdsiwa ka-kih-nipahdt. 

“tawinamawin | dyitawiskisik niwth-nipahik, nistésd | Pitwdw dsah. 

pikw ist dtah ch-itwit, mwdahisth dkwah d-wih-pd-sakinikut, ka-klskisé- 
payit antht nétukdsiwa ka-kth-st-kakdskimikut, 

“ nistésé," itwéw dsah mina kihtwém, “ tawinamawin 1” itwdw dsah ; 
“ dyitawthkwakan niwih-nipahik 1” ttwéw désah. 

yohldpayiyiw oma piwapisku-waskahikan, pihtukdw dsah, wipamdw 
Ghutah pihtsdythk Gh-uwikiyit uskinikiskwdwah min uskinikiwah, 

mt dsa ith bhth uskinikiskwdwah: “ ntsdhkus, ay-apih 1” itth 
sah. 

kitahlawd wayawitimihk 6tah ké-matwd-takuhtdyit bhi wihtikowah. 

“lawinamawin, piwdpisku-waskahikan k-dwikit !”’ uwdyiwah deah. 

dkust dsah yéhtinam awa uskinihiw, dh-atih-kiskikwdtahwat Ghih 
wihtikowa. 

Gkwah awa uskinikiskwéw dkutah ay-aydw. ayisk mistahi kitimak- 
dyimik thi uskinikiskhwiwah min bhi napdwah. Kitahtawd ké-pimuyuhikut 
kdékway uhtsth kitah-manitowit. tdpwd mistahd abdhkisiwin aydw ; mistahi 
dkwah min dyaku manitéwiw dsah. dkwah usthtdyiwa ndpdw-ayswinisah, 
dkutowa ékwah dh-pusiskahk, mina undpdwin dh-usihtayit. tapwd papd- 
méatsiw, co, . 

kitahtawd Omisi tik Ghi: “ mistahi histdsak kipikiskatikwak. mistahi 
kakwatakihtawak, nawals kakwé-waépamatsik,” ith; “th, tapwd wiya 
tah namuya wahyaw ispatindw kik-dtihtan. dkutah mikiwahp ka-wdpahtdn, 
mitunth é-misak, dkutah ayisiyiniwak uhtsitaw dh-kakwatikihdt, dh-watsist- 
wanthkdt, dkwah mana ayisiyiniwah éh-lah-lahtsi-kwdskuhtit, Ghutah mitunih 
Gh-sakaskindtsik ayisiyiniwak, nandtuhk dy-isi-kakwatakihtatstk, pikw it6- 
wihk dh-ati-pah-pikuskawat anah dkutah k-Gyat mate-dyisiyiniw,” itil 
dsah; “dwaku piku dh-dyimahk,; maka pikuh uskinikiskwdwa dkunih 
pikuh k-6tinat wiya ; ndpdwa namuya pisiskdyimdw. mayaw pimapamiskth, 


‘Inclusion of other words between prefixed particle and verb is very uncommon; 
somewhat more common is the start, ag here, toward such inclusion, which ig then an- 
nulled by forming the verb all over again. - 


uo 


"239 


Omist kikedtih: ‘mahtth sikitan, awina wahyaw .kd-pahkihtintyik’,” itik 
dsah ; “ dhusi kik-dtik.” oe 
dh-kizi-kakdskimiht awa uskinikiskwiéw, wayawiw, dh-utinahk kit-si- 
nimat, sipwdhtiw dsah. dkwah kitahtawd, mayaw dh-abispi-kisikayik, ka~ 
wapahtahk. dt dsah wahyaw dh-wimahlat; daah wapamik bhih malts-dyisiyini- 
wahkd-kapd-kistk kd-tah-téhtsi-kwdskuhtiyit, uhisitaw dsah mituni mthtsit 
Gkdkwatakihat awah uskinikiskwiwah. ; 
kd-pa-nakiskakut, 6mist dsah itik: “ mahtih sikitan, awina wahyaw 
y kd-pahkthtiniyik, nistsds 1” 
oa itihkimik dsah. mwihtst d-wi-sikit, kd-manipitamiyit dma ustésah 
hd-kih-usthtaytt. : . 
“© nisisas,’ aitayitdw ; pihkahtéwahtik disik awa 1" 
dkus ist kimdts ulinum ‘mistik; misdskwatus ; saskawuhtdw. dh-atih- 
kimih-sakiniskénikut, pihtukahik. potih dsah misiwé kd-~wapamat uskini- 
kiskwadwa pikw itéwihk dh-nd-ndtwéskikdsuyit. oo és 
dmisi itwawak bkth uskinikiskwéwak : “m anih kiyanaw mina skusi 
Gh-kth~isi-miyusiyahk, awa uskinikiskwiw k-dsi-miyusit |” uwéwak. ‘oke 
kd-mé-maskisitsik, . a 
haw, datdyit dsah téhtapiwin, kiythtsdékusiyit mistikwa. blah..dh-lsimy, 
asuyit, ulinam Omah kd-kith-manahut émah miatik. Py 
“ta-wth-piwipiskoww 1” rtwiw dsah; “ pi-kwaskuhtitst, kita-wihe: -~_ 
kissin 1" itwdw dsah. - . we ; ‘ 
. lapwd awa ch-kwaskuhtit, kisisin awa mats-dyisiyiniw ka-ndh-nipahat- 
ohih uskinikiskwiwah. dkusi nipahiw awa pihkahtdwahtik ; nipahéw ohth- 
mals-dyisiyiniwah. . se 
iluhidw ustdsah aapin itdh kdé-kiw-ultaskaldl. -, 
hawina kth-wadpamdw, dh-mdtuytt, wiyah dh-mawihkdlikut, ah-at-is- 
itwdtstk, “ kistminaw ukth-kitamékuh wihtikowa 1” dh-itwiyit, médkwals 
ustdsah kd-pdhtawdl. . a 
“dkuytkuhk poni-mdtuk, nistésttik | nitakuhtan 1” itwdw asah. 
mistaht- miywdythtamuk Gki uskinikiwak. mitdlaht iskwiéwah kakdk- 
( tndw dh-pimdtsthdl, dw~utinamuwdt ohth iskwdwah, dkwah mistahi miy- 
wdythtamuk oki napdéwak, dh-wiwitsik. 
kitahtawd nandtuhk pisk,  namuya lapwih niya ayisiyiniw,” itwidw 
dsah awa uskinikishwdw ; “ nnatawdyimik dkwah nohlawiy. nlawits dkwak 
nivih-wawaskdsiwin, dkuyikuhk kahkiyaw kimiyu-totdlindwaw, uskini- 
kiskwiwak dh-miyitakuk. ” 


~~ 


Once upon a time, long ago, a Windigo carried on his-work of exterm- 
ination, Ten youths took flight. That Windigo, with a face on either side 
of his head, no matter how many tents there were, always killed off all 
the people. | os 

Then those youths, who were ten, said, ‘Let us flee! We alone shall 
not he killed,” they said. ; 

So they made ready; far off on a mountain they went to build their 
tipi. Then, after a time, they went back; they fetched their little brother. 
They had their tent off there alone. Then, at one time, as they continued 


1 These two words have no place here. Perhaps the informant was going to say 
nandluhk pisiskiwah : “various animals,” : . 


83186-~164 


240 \ 


to dwell off there, and the little boy always stayed to keep the house, then 
; presently, as he was feeding the fire, he ran a splinter into himself. He pulled 
\ out the sliver of wood. When he threw out of the door that sliver of wood 


ocg "Sher up.” . 
- When she came into the tent, after he bad twice thrown her out, 
again he threw her out. : 

Then, when again she came in, she called to him, “Big brother!” 

“Ho, I had better do it again! I should not be surprised if she were 
to turn into a young woman, if I threw her out again!’ he thought. Then 
he spoke thus: “Let her be a young woman, since it seems that I am being 
aided by the Powers!” he said. : 

Then, when there entered a young woman, “Be seated, my big sister!” 
said the boy. 

“Burnt-Stick” it seems that he called the young woman. And now 
he was glad to have a big sister; and he was glad that all his elder brothers 
would have this young woman to do their household work for them. 

And now it appears that in his usual way Wisahketchahk was staying 
with these young men; it was because they knew in which direction that 
Windigo would take flight. For Wisahketchahk wag badly frightened; 
that was why he had asked hospitality of these young men. 

“You will see, little brother!” he must have said.: 

Wisahketchahk was always the first to come into the tipi. 

“What would you think,’ asked the boy, “of our: having a young 
woman?” ‘ 

And Wisahketchahk, for his part, said, “We shall have her as our 
younger sister!” for it seems that Wisahketchahk had every manner of 
ereature for his younger brother or sister. ; 

Then this younger sister of theira was very diligent, sewing for them, 
and doing their household work. It seems that she kept them very well, 
so that they, in turn, became very fond of her. When they did their 
hunting, without delay, it seems, she always tanned the hides: and made 
clothes for them, taking in every way excellent care of them. 

_ Presently Wisahketchahk spoke as follows: “Oh, by this time the 
Windigo with a face on either side of his head knows that we are here,” 
he said; “But we shall go visiting,” he told her; “And then, if you hear 
anything, never listen to it, when you are gathering wood,” he must have 
told the young woman who was called Burnt-Stick; and, “Never, when 
you see anything, take it up,” he told her; Never take it up. Then we 
y shall be off visiting again. If then again you hear anything, when we are 

not at home, great manitou power has that two-faced Windigo. So great 
that even I, Wisahketchahk, fear him,” Wisahkatchahk must have said; 
“Then, again, you will hear exactly, as it will seem, the sound of our voices,” 
he said; “Really, for four nights we shall be off ‘visiting. And it will be 
very cold weather. Then you will hear our voices; do not open the door,” 
he must have told the young woman. 

_ Accordingly, when the young woman had been instructed, she started 
to gather firewood, as soon as all her brothers had gone away. And she’ 
split all the wood, so that it should be quite ready for use; and she brought 
it all indoors ready for use; and she cut a big poplar tree besides. Then 
she closed up their tipi solidly. It was very cold weather. 


241 - 


Presently she heard someone call, “Little sister, here we are!’’ seemed 
to be spoken for her.to hear. 

But, after all, she had been warned; she did not stir from the spot. 
At last- all round "the lodge there was the sound of them dying of cold. 
In the morning she arose; when she went outside, she found not even a 
footprint. She wondered. 

“So it really is thus!” thought the young woman. 

When four nights had passed, the young men arrived. Then, when 
the young woman always gathered wood all day, she never picked up any- 
thing, although she saw all manner of things. But then at one time she 
saw a most beautiful feather. . 

She picked it up, when, “OE course I could not get the better of you!’”’ 
said the two-faced Windigo, suddenly rising from the feather. 

Thus spoke the Windigo:. “Truly, I shall have good eating, when I 
eat Burnt-Stick! Now, Burnt-Stick, first I shall take you home with me; 
I shall make you fat.”’ 

With that the Windigo took the young woman on his back and carried 
her. He took her home with him, to where he had an old woman whom he 
led a dreadful life; every day this old woman had his stew ready for him, 
cooking it done before he got home, for every day he ate two- men, his 
habit being, as soon as he got home, first to eat their entrails. 

; So now, “Grandmother,” he said; “have you boiled the entrails ready 
for me to eat? Now very pretty is the young woman I have brought home 
to eat. Do not spare your pains to fatten her,” he said. 

Then, “Very well,’”’ said the old woman. 

The old woman became very fond of the maid, Burnt-Stick. 

Then, it seems, ‘“Grandchild, surely I hate the very thought of killing 
you,” she said; “Do try to deceive him; do you, instead, kill me,” the old 
woman said; ‘And then you will set me to boil,” said the old woman. 

Truly, the maid was pleased at what the old woman told her. 

“But how must I do to kill you?” asked the young woman. 

‘Thus spoke the old woman: “You will take an ax; you will strike a 
blow on my head,” said the old woman; ‘Yonder, in the direction where 
there ig no sun, are four hills, the first and nearest of which you will climb. 
From there you will see the second hill. When you have crossed four hills, 
there try to-reach in your flight an iron house. The one who dwells there 
will overcome him. If you manage to get there in your flight, then you 
will live,” she told her; ‘‘When you reach the placé in your flight, speak 
thus: ‘Big brother, the both-side-faced Windigo wants to kill me!’ you 
will say. Then they will open the door for you.’ 

Accordingly, even as the old woman had directed Burnt-Stick, she 
struck her on the head. Then she skinned her and cut her up, whom she 
had slain. She put her in the kettle to boil. When she had cooked her 
done, she ran away as fast asshe could. Sheran withallher might, Presently 
she saw a@ hill, and all night long she ran. Then she saw another 
hill; she crossed it, too. She saw another hill; this, too, she crossed. 
When she climbed the next hill, already she heard the Windigo shouting to 

er 

“It is no use! The earth will not be large enough to give you refuge!” 
he shouted to her. 


242 


46 


It appears that the Windigo was’ very angry at having eatei ‘hia 


grandmother. Now she was running down-hill; as she climbed the next 
rise, there down below was the iron house. When she looked behind her, 
already she saw the Windigo coming; then really she fled with all her 
might. When she reached it, she forgot the instruction she had been given 
by the old woman whom she had killed. ran 

“Open the door for me! Both-Side-Eyes wants to kill me, big brother!” 
she cried, 

Although she called in all manner of ways, he was even about to seize 
her, when she remembered what the old woman had told her. 

“Big brother,” she cried again, “open the door for me!” 
“Both-Side-Face wants to kill me!" she cried, 


The door of the iron house swung open. She went in. She saw those 


she erted; 


« who had their dwelling inside there, a young woman and a young man. 


Then the young woman said to her, “Sister-in-law, sit down!” 

Soon with noise the Windigo arrived outside, 

2, “Open for me, Iron-House Dweller!” he cried. 

he J hen the young man opened the door and chopped off the Windigo’s 
Cad, -) Jf, 

Then the young woman stayed there. For that young woman and 
that man were very good to her. Then in time, they gave her something to 
keep in the bosom-fold of her garment, to give her manitou power. And 
really, she had great strength; she too had’ now manitou power. ‘hen 
they made men’s clothes, which she puton,* * * * * * # * # # 
Then really, she went about hunting. ‘ 

Then at one time they said'to-her, “Your brothers miss you very much. 
They are suffering greatly; you ought to try to see them,” they told her; 
“Now, not far from here you will come to a hill. There you will see a very 
large tipi. He who lives there is intent on tormenting people; he builds 
a-nest from which he jumps on. people. . That place is full of people who 

suffer from all kinds of injuries, since that evil person who lives there 

“bréaks different parts of their bodies as be comes down on them,” they 
told her; “This is the only difficulty, but, after all, he takes only young 
‘womnen; he pays no attention to men. As soon’ as he sees you, he will 
say to you," * * * * # & & 4 & e & wR oH HR HR HN 
ihey told her; ‘That is what he will. say to you.” 


When the young woman had been instructed, she went out of the 
house, taking provision for the journey. She set out. Presently, just ag 
the day had reached noon, she saw the place. Although she walked far 
round to avoid it, ghe must have been seen by that evil man who all day 
jumped down on young women, taking pleasure in tormenting them. 

When he had come and met her, he said to her, “| * * * * * ” 

So it seemed he was her cousin, * * * * * # # & & ® H % 

“‘ ‘My male cousin,’ I have been calling her; why it is Burnt-Stick!” 

Thereupon she secretly took up a ‘stick of saskatoon wood; she used 


it as a cane. He led her home by the hand and took her into his fipi. - 


And there she saw nothing but young women whose bodies were broken in 
every way from having beén jumped upon. 


These young women said, “Only to think that we, too, were as beauti- 
ful. as this young woman!” Thus spoke those crippled ones,® 


fan 


243 


Then, when he had placed a seat, and had climbed up on a tree which 
stood there, she took that stick which she had picked up. 

“Let it turn into iron!” she said;. ‘When he comes leaping, let him 
impale himself!’ she said. wee, 

And truly, as he jurnped, he impaled himself,;thaf evil man who used 
to kill the young women. So Burnt-Stick killed, him; she killed that evil 
man. en ee 

She went to where she had left her brothers ‘when she departed. 

What did she see, they were weeping, mourning for her, and all the 
while saying, “Our little sister was eaten by the Windigo!” ‘Thus spoke 
her brothers as she listened to them. , 

“Knough; cease weeping, brothers! I have come!” she said. 

Those young men were very glad. She had picked out ten of the 
women she had restored to life, and taken them for her. brothers. Then 
those men were very glad to. have wives, nt 

Then at one time, “I am not really a human being,” said the young 
woman; “And now my father wants me. So I shall turn into a deer. I 
have completed my benefaction to all of you, in giving you young women.’ 


(26) The Thunderer’s Brother-in-Law 


Louis Moasomin 
nih-namishwikdpaw. 


kitahtawé yahkih mine mitatasiwak nipdwak. 

dsay mina tapasiwak, “usim kike-~mdstsihikunaw awa wihttkéw, ” 
dh-itwiitstkh dsah, . 

piyak uskinikiskwésisah sipwéhtahiwak, usimisiwdwa. nikwatis dsa 
nauih-usthtawak wikiwiw. dkwah dkuté ay-aydwak. Gkwah kinwds dkutd 
dsah uy-Ghpikihiwak ohih usimisiwdwa. piyisk tspimihk dsa mistikwah 
tsimahiwak, dkutah dh-mdnukawdtsik, dh-watsistwanihkdtsik, itah dh- 
uwikiyit, Kitahktawd kahkiyow kékway dsah pawdtam awa kandts-Gskini- 
kiskwiw. dhwah kituhtawd ka-kiskdythtahk kitah-pimihdl. dkwah kutakah 
nipdsisah minah usimisiw dsah awa uskinikiskwdw. 

dkwah omisi k-titdt usimisah : “ niwih-ntdmisun,” itwiw dsah. 

“ nimind, tanitih maka ké-kih-miskaman minisah? pipun 6ma,” 
ttwdw dsah awa napdsis, 

“ nistmis, namuya nika-kih~pwilawihtan,” ttwéw dsah ; “ ayisk nika- 
pimihan,” itwiw dsah awa uskinikiskuwdw. oo 

dkwa tapwi wowdyiw, d-stpwihtit, kutak askiy dy-isi-pimihdt awa 
uskinikishwdw., tipwd dkuté dh-lakuhtat akémaskihk, matsi-mawisow. 
katish dsah dh-dpihta-lisikayik Ghuti takuhtiw. - dsay mdtsi-mawisow 
misiskwatominah. pdyak mwéhtsi d-sdkaskinahiat umawiswakan, dsay 
mina ‘kutak Gh-atih-sikaskinahtat, kitahtawd priydsiwah, kd-pdhiakusiyit. 
kayahté ndspitsi-sdkimik.  dGh-pdkupayit, kayahté kd-wah-waniskanikut 
uskinikiwa, mistah dkwoh dkutah miywdyihtam.  mdh-masthitowak ; 
uvitsimusiv) bhi uskinikiwah. | 

dh-utdkusiniyik iytkuhk, kiwiw. tapwd minisah kiwdhtataw. wiki- 
wohk éh-takuhtét, matsih-kisisam ohih minisah. mistah ékwah miywdyih- 
tamiyiwa ustdsah d-kisisambwat. 


” 


-& 


“tanitd dtukd wahtinahk kisiminaw Ghi minisah?” itwéwak 6ki 
uskinikiwak. . “ 

mamaskdtamwak ; uski-minisah dh-mitsttsik dh-pipuniyik uhtsih, k-oh- 
mamaskatahkik, dkwah wiyah kakiké ispimihk watsistwanthk awa uskini- 
kiskwéw dh-uwikit. dsay mayaw éh-waniskdtsik, sipwahtdwak oki uskini- 
kiwak, wiyah tahtu-kisikdw pikuh dh-méatsitstk,.Gh-1s-atuskdtsik, kahkiyaw 
kikway dh-matsitutawdtsik. dsay mina uskinikiskwéw nihtakusiw. 

asay mina dmisitéw usimisah dhi naépdsisak-: ‘ minah niwihntamisun,” 
itwiw dsah awa uskinitkiskwdéw. or ae 

tipwih dsay mina sipwéhtdw awa-uskinikiskwdéw, ah~pimihat. dsay 
mina akdmaskthk takuhtéw. dsay minatgkutd itah kd-kih-uhtinahk minisah 
matsi-mawisbw mina. poétth dsay mina ptiyakwaw d-sdékaskinahtat umawis- 
wakan, dsay mina piydsiwa kd-pdéhtakusiyit. mina néspttst-sikimik. kay- 
ahté piku mina sdsay ké-wadpamdat, Gh-Gpahkawisit shi uskintkiwah ka-kth- 
wipamdt, dsay mina méh-masihitéwak. dkutah kapd-kisik ay-ayawak. 
ayisk miywaéyimadw Ghih uskinikiwah. 

dy-uldkusiniyik dsay mina wawdyiw d-wih-kiwét. kiwdw, mina Gh- 
atih-pimihat. kdkdis dsa dh-lipiskayik, wikiwahk takuhtéw. dsay mina 
méatisi-kisisam minisah. dsay mina amatsiwdw. mistaht miywdythtamwak 
mana oki uskintkiwak, minisah miyitsitwadwi. } 

ékwah mayaw Gh-wdpaniyik, dsay mina mdtsiwak. mayaw ustdsah 
Gh-ki-sipwahléyit, dsay mina pd-pinasiwiw aw Sskinikiskwéw, dh-pi- 
ndnapatsihiawadt utayowinisiyiwa, umaskisiniyiwa mina. , 

 pdyakwadw mina niwih-ntéamisun,” itéw dsah usimisah. 

lapwé sdsay mina wawayiw. dkwa dsah mina dkuté takuhtdw ; mdtsi- 
mawis6w iudéh khd-nad-niamisut. dsay mina pdyakwaw d~sakaskinahtat 
umawiswakan, Gsay mina sbhkih ka~péhtakusiyit plydsiwah. kayahté piku 
mina kd-kiskdyihtahk, iyikuhk Gh-apahkawisit, dkutah mina mah-masthito- 
wak, ” 

dw-uidkusiniyik, sdsay mina kiwdhtataéw minisah. dkwah mina matsi- 
kisisam. d-kih-kisisahk minisah, kdwi Gmatsiwéw uwatsistwanihk. 4- 
takuktétsik, mdmaskdtamuk oki uskinitkiwak, tahtu-kisikdw dh-mitsitsik 
uski-minisah, 

omisth dsah itwéwak : “ tantéh dtukd ah-uhtinahk awa kistmisinaw 
uski-minisah ?” itwdwak dsah. 
- ad, asay mina mayaw Gh-wadpaniyik, sipwihtdwak, d-kih-mitsisutstk. 
kahkiyaw sdsay mina Gh-kth-méstsi-sipwahtayit, awa uskinikiskwdéw dsay 
mina wihtamawdw usimisah min d-wth-sipwahtét. tapwd sdsay mina ati- 
sipwéhtiw dsah, ch-ati-pimihat. dkuté dh-takuhtét itah manah kay-isi- 
ntamisut, mwéhisih ah-mdisih-mawisut, dsay dsah minah piydsiwah ka- 
matsi-péhtakusiyit. dsay mina naspits-sékimik awa uskinikiskwdw. ‘dkwah 
éh-apahkawisit, kayahta kih-wapamaéw mina dkuté uskinikiwa. miywiyih- 
tam-mistahi aw uskinikiw, dh-wdw-utihtikut ohi uskintkiskwawa. 

_matsikah atsiyd, pikuh ah-kth-mah-masihitutsik, dsay mina kiwéw aw 
Oskinikiskwaw. adtah d-takuhtét wikiwahk, namwats kaskthiw  kita-ki- 
kthisdkusit ka-wikit wwatsistwanihk. atah wah-kihtsékusitsth, pwdtawihow. 
nlawdts nahapiw tsikih iskwahtamihk. “ tandhk oma?” ttéyithtam. ayisk 
uhisitaw dtukd totakéwisiw awa uskinikiskwéw, usdm mistahih dh-kiht- 
sdyimikut ohih ustisah, ch-kikiskawdwasut dsah. mayaw awa ustdésimaw 
Gh-takuhtét wikiwahk, dsah éh-paspapit, awina dhih, kih-wapamdw usimi- 
wawa Gh-apiyit, dh-kikiskawawasuyit. namwats ahpoh pihtukdw, iyikuhk 


245 


Gh-ndpdwisit awa uskinikiw. mistahi pakwdiam. ayisk mituni kanawdéyim~ 
dwak usimimdwa ; namuya kiskdyimaéwak wihkdts népdwa kita-kth-wapam- 
Gyit. kutak mina dh-takuhidt, tdpiyahk ch-wapamat, dkus isi wdyuniw. 
_ahkiyaw dsah kth-nakatéwak oki uskinikiwak, usdm dh-ndpéwihikutsik 
dh-titamiyit. kdkdts dsah dh-wdpaniyik, utsawdsimisiw aw uskinikiskwaw. 
’ dkwah ékutah ay-ayaw ; ohi pikuh usimisah, ndpdsisah, dyakunth piku 
wits-ayamaw. . 

mwdéhtsi nisusdp tipiskdw dh-pdyakutsik, dkwah Omis itéw ; ayisk aw 
iskwdw k-dtsawdsimisit napdsisah aydwiw : -“kanawdyim kitihkwatim ; 
niuth-nikuhtan, ” ttéw dsah usimisah. 

. kahkiyaw utayswinisiyiwa utinamwdw ; naspits ispimihk akutawéw, 
Smisih dsah dh-itéyihtahk : “ nka-kakwd-stpwéhtan,” ch-itéyihtahk ds awa 
uskinikiskwaw. 

lipwah it dh-sakahk Gh-takuhtét, wanakwayah kikamuhdéw mistikuhk ; 
tsikahikan dkutah astaw ; ayisiyinihkadnah usihdw, 

“awa Gtah napdsis k-ayat, ‘nimisd 1’ itiskih, ‘ha !’ kik-dtaw,” 
itaw hi ayisiyinthkanah. 

tdpwd dkus ist isi-wdpindw' shi utawasimisah, namuya kayds a-kth- 
nokuhat. dkwah kitahtawd kinwés &h-wd-wiwépitét, Miahtawé mah-mato- 
yiwa. tépwdw awa napésis. 

.“nimisd, ntihkwatim matow 1” itwiéw dsah. 

“ tsdskwah | nimdkwd-nikuhtén !°"'-itik dsa chi ayisiyinthkanah ka- 
kth-usthimiht. 

piyisk dkwah tipiskdyiw. piyisk dkwah wih-kawatsiwak. mdh-matowak 
bhi usk-awdsisah ka-kiki-wépiniht, éh-kth-néwu-tipiskdyik, kitahtawd piy- 
dsiwah mistaht kd-pdhidkusiyit.  kayahté piku otah kih-apiyiwa. . 

“ tapwd mistahi kikitimakisin, nistih,” itik dsa thi piydsiwa; “ dsay 
anih minah unadpémiw kimis,” ttik Ghi piydsiwa; “maka wiya nipd- 
natin awa kitihkwatim. namuya. misawats ka-kth-pamihtwasun, ” otik 
asah, : . 

dkwah utaydwinisah ispimihk ka-kth-akutawiht nah-nihtinamak ohi 
piydsiwah,. mayaw d-kih-pustayowinisdt, dkust atth-utindyiwa ohi apisis- 
awasisah. wist dkwah wayawiw. utasdmah d-kih-utindt, kd-wapahtahk ésa 
ttéh umisah dy-isth-sipwihtdytt. kapd-kisik pimipahtaw. kitahtawd dsah 
Gh-at-étakusiniyik, dtah waydhisadhk kihdpapahtam- maskusiwakan.’  at- 

- Yuhidw. “ 
“hud, dwakw dtuké nimis wikth |” ttwaw dsah. 

pihtukiw. ponam. dh-kih~ponahk, pa-pimisin. dsah dh-ayitdpit, 
kitahtawd umisa tohtisimiyiwa ké~wapamat, dsgh d-kih-maniswayit. | 

“ wahwd, tépwd nikisindisthik ” itdyth dsah ; “ dkwah dwakunth — 
nika-kth-uhtsi-kakitsthahtay nitihkwatim ka-pi-maskamikawiydn |” itdyth- 


tam dsa. ‘ < 


1 Hyphen is used, because the meaning is here isi: “thither, thus” plus wdpindw : 
“she abandons him.” By contrast, the very common unit word istwipindw: “he throws 
him that way or there” has -wip-: “throw” as a non-initial stem. This illustrates the 
difficulty of drawing a clear line between simple words and compounds; for a native , 
speaker it would be easy. . 

The repetition of isi is worth noting; it is perhaps due to the existence of the much 
commoner homonym; as homonymy is rare in Cree, the combination isi-wipindw is . 
inadequate and disturbs the speaker. ao. . 

ba ormal form doubtless maskusiwikdn , and below, the diminutive, normal: maskus- 
twikdnis. i 


246 

dhwah dkutah kapisiw. kakisépd mina sdsay sipwihtdw. aspin dsah 
’ umisah itah a-kih-at-ituhtdyit, kapd-kisik ati-mdtahiw. dsay mina éh- 
utakusiniytk, kutak mina ké-wapahtahk maskusiyukanis. pihtukéw. poénam. 
dsay mina ,ah-pa-pimisthk, kutakah kd-wapamat umisah Loltosimiyiwa. 
dsay mina mihidtam d-kth-pa-natimiht utihkwatima. sipwahtdw kikisdpah, 
hitahtawé dh-pi-pmuhtat, kitahtawé kd-sdkdwdt, dtah mikiwahp, kd-wapamat 
umisah pahkdkin é-mékwdaw-usihtayit. dkus ist lépwdlaw. 

bmisitédw: “ nimiséd [" itéw ; “ nitakusinin 1" 

dkwah dmisth itwiw aw skinikiskwdw: “ namuy dwiyak noh-usimisin. 
dkus 6ma pikuh céh-kiy-ist-pdyakuydn, ” itwéw dsah aw éskinikiskwéw. 

“tapwd niya mikih-pd-maskamikawin ntihkwatim, ” itwaw dsah. 

simak kisiwadsiw awa uskinikiskwéw. mdskistawdw Ghi népdsisah, 
tsikahikan dw-uhtsi-pakamahwdl, dh-nipahat. mitunih pikinatahwéw. 

mika wiya d-kisdwdtisitsik sawdyimdwak Gpakusisak, d-with-kakwé- 
pimdtsihatsik ohi kd-nipahimiht napasisah. , 

dkwah tapwé, “ niya nik-dwataw |” itwéw dsa itowahk ka-mistkititsik 
apakusis. 

iapwd dsah nandpdtsihdwak. ayisk kayds kih-ayisiyiniwiwak; . usdm. — 
kahkiyaw kdkwayth ch-witsthikowisitsik, dyak ohtst k-bhtspayik. tapwa 
pimatsihawak. 

dkwah kikisipdé awa ndépéw kd-wiwit ohih uskinikiskwéiwa ka-moht- 
sdwiyit, usimisiyiwa ka-nipahayit, Omisitdw : “ ntaw-dsamik oki apakusisi- 
nélukdwak, ’’ itdw dsah. 

dkwoh taépwi ntaw-dsamdw awa . 
wapamat ohih ka-kih-nipahat ndpdsisah. 

“€@say’ disik oki mina Gh-kih-pimatsihdtsik matsi-nétukésiwak |”. 
itwaéw dsah. a 

dkwah dmisih itwéw awa népadw : “ kiyam ékayah nipah, niwikimakan. 
kdyiwéhk anah nka-witsdwdw miydtstydni,” itdw. 

dkust pinihdw aw oskinikiskwdw. dkwah tapwd oki notukdwak waway- 
théwak dsisimiwdwa, ta-mdisiyit. , 

' tépwi awa népdéw d-wih-malsit, “ dstam, .waskinikiyin | iskékdné 

nahahkapiyani,’”’ itadw aw awasis. : 

dkwah tapwdé wawdyiw awa awisis, Gkwah d-sipwéhtétsik, ohih ah- 
witsdwat Shi ndpdwah, é&h-matsiytt. ; 

iydtah-mdtahdtwawi, “ namuy dwaku,” itik mana ; “ usém apisisisiw, ” 
itik mana. . : 

akwah tdpwd kutakah mitunth dh-mah-mahkiskamiyit, dwakunth dti- 

pimiisahwayit mis-iyapéw-wawaskdésiwah, wipats dti-nipahdyit. - ndway 
Gh-takuhtdt, dsay kdkdts kist-wiyanthdyiwd. ; 
dkwah omisi itik : “ nawatst 6ma utakisiy,” itik, 
tdpwd nawatsiw. 
dkwah dh-kisisahk, Omisi ttdw: “ hayttaw uhtsih kika-mitsindnaw, ” 


skinikiskwdw. dh-pihtukdt, kd- 


_ Gkwah, “ tandhki k-sh~itwdyin?” itwéw awa népiw; “kiy bma 
kitawasisin, mistahi kd-ntawdythtaman kita-mitsiyin, ” itéw asa. 
“ maka ayisk namuya nikaskihtamdsun kakway,” itwéw awa napdsis. 
“Gha’ ,” atk. j : 
'The verb nahahkapiw: “he is staying, as son-in-law, with his wife's people’; it 


applies here only in so far as during this stay a son-in-law is supposed to show himself a 
good worker.: Irony. 


\ 


, . 
. 
ppd . 


, 247 
tdpwé dh-kisisahk 6ma mayaw ulakisiy, tapwd dyitaw uhtsth mitsiminam- 
wak, dh-mitstsik. akwah kékdts éh-kitdtsik, maskamdw, 
* hdw, Oma mitsih, piydsiw 1” itwiw dsah. 
“ oh, ‘kdkway ilah ké-hitimakdyimikuyin ?"' ittk dsah ohit napdwa ; 
“ hakwdyahow !” tttk dsah ; “ ati-pastkéw 1” itik dsah. ‘ 
tah kisiwak ustikwdn uhpima dh-astayik, utinamiyiwa itdh tel k-dst- 
hdsttaskandyit ; nayahtahik. Rawiskésow, - 
“kakwayahuh 1” ith ; “ pastkoh 1” tik: “m ‘ani alah th-manitow- 
akdyimuyin, itah wiya at-dtimitani, kikaontpahitn 3 kik-Gti-palakwakimat- 
atin.” 
tdpwd ati-sipwahtiw’ awa népdsis. tsiki wikiwahk dh-at-dydt, dsay 
kisiwak kd-pdtsdstamuhtdyit, Gh-atimikut. dhus isi sd-sdkwakimatik.. 
dkwah dsah nipahik ; dskanah ké-kthisitaskamak, dkwah mistahi miywiy= 
ihtam awa uskirikiskwdw, nodhtaw Gh-pd-nipahimiht. 
dékwah dsay. mina aki nétukdsiwak ka-kth-pimatisthdtsik mina itwéiwak, 
" ndyakwdaw ta-kakwd-pimatsihatsik |" 
tapwd awa kd-misikitit notukiw dpakusisi-nétukdw dwatdw dwaku. 
tdpwd dsay mina pimdtsihdwak. dsa mana wah-pimdtsihdtwawi, matutisi- 
wak. . . . a 
dikwah ‘dsay bntria kikisdpd, “ ntaw-asam kohkuminawak,” itwiw deah 
awa napdw. ~~ ; 
tapwd Gh-ituhtét awa iskinikiskwaw, kih-pimdtisiyiwa oh ndpdsisah. 
“dsay dtsik oki mina kihtwém ! naka fcmme ody ltarnual éh-nipah- 
imiht !” 1twéw dsah, 
“kiyam dkus dna ‘pdyakwaw mina nika-utlsdwaw, ” itwiw awa nipaw. 
iapwih pinthdw awa uskinikiskwdw. dkwah wawiyiw awa ndpdsis. 
malsiwak. pé-uisamik 6hi ndpiwah. dsay mina sipwdéhtiwak ; asay mina 
matahdwak wawdskdsiwah. 
“awa ist?” Gh-dtiy-itat, “ namuya | usdm apistwisin, ” dtik, 
mitunth ndspits d-mdh-mdhkiskamiyit, dwakunth pémitisuhwaytt, 
“dtap kika-pdy-dtamin, ”’ tk. 
lipwd mwdstas dkuté Gh-takuhtat, dsay kdkdls kisi-~wiyanthdyiwa. 
. Gsay mina, “ haw, awdsis, 6ma “nawatst 3 musthkuhk ima ulakisth,” 
iik dsa, 
tipwd, “ dyitaw uhisih mina kika-milsindnaw, ’ ’ tdw dasa, 
ldpwd, “ niswéw dkwah dkust kititwan,”’ itik asa. 
“ ayisk niya nikitimdkisin, ” itwdw dsah awa napasis. 
“cha,” itwéiw dsa awa napdw. 
dkwah tapwi, “dah niya k-dsi-misdk, dkuté ist niya niliisi-mitsin, 
ttwdw awa napdsis. , 
piyisk mina sakitsimdw. dkwah tépwd dyitaw yhisi mitsiminamnwak 7 g 
dh-mitsitsik. apisis dy-iskwahtahkik, isprmihk isiwapinam awa nipiisis. OSes 
“haw, dma mitsth,' itwéw dsah, “ piydsiw 1” itwéw dsah, . 
adbwah dsay mina uhpimad astéyiw dma ustikwan, dsay mina dwakuh 
k-stinamiyit, d-nayahtahikut. dsay mina pasikétisahuk, “ kakwayahuh 1” 
Gh~itikut, dkwah ati-sipwahtéw. mitunth papdsimik. 
1 kispin itah atimitani, kik-ati-mdtakuskdin ntasdmak uhtsi !” ittk 
dsa ; 


1The medial stem is ~akimd- “snowshoe” (verbal), ef. Ojibwa agim, Menomini 

dkim (animate): “snowshoe.” The word vsed in Cree is asdém (animate): “snowshoe.” 
I did not catch the word when dictated, but succeeded in making informant repent. it. 

Asa result it is not used in the recurrence of the incident, below. “4! 


2B 


a 


“ 248 J 


4 


VY /Vapwa sipwihiéw, kisiwak ékwa wikiwahk Gh-at-Gyat, ka-pah-atimikut. 


f 
tamawin ! niwih-nipahik 1” ttwéw awa ndpasis. 


~ 


- 


émisi itwéw dsah d-wih-pé-nipahtkut : ‘opiydsiw, éyakw ana nipah- 


dkwa tapwé piydsiwak séhki pahiakustwak. nipahéwak shih napéwah, 
awasisah ka-wih-nipahdyit. dkust. pé-wayawt-kwaskuhtiw aw dskinikisk- 
wiw. dsay mina kihtwém nipahdw ohi ustmisah. —__ . wee 

“ Kiktwam dkwah pimatsihaydkuh, ka-mdhtsihitindwaw |” itd ,dhd 
nolukdsiwah, . eo coon 

“haw,” itwiwak oki notukdwak, “ misawats namuya ta-kih-nipah~ 
tkunaw. kiyam kdéydpits péyakwdw pimdtsthatér,." iwéwak, « _ 

tdpwa mina sdsay usihiawak ima mana, itah kézpimatsihatsik. tapwd 
kisthid@wak. dsay mina kikisdpadh dé-ntawapanat, dh-pimdtisiytt bhi napa- 


-sisah awa uskinikiskwdw, kakwi-nipahéw. .-* : 


th ay : 
mwéhisi é-wih-nipahél, “awa niwih-nipalik, piydsiwitik !” daay 
minah ttwéw awa napésis. Jag TE “¢ 
lapwa mistahi pahtdkusiwak piydsiwak. <=." 
haw,” omis tk; “ntawdts otéh tapimihk kit-dsi-kiwéhtahitan, ” 


iwiw awa piydsiw >“ “dsay nikis-thpikikiw ka-kih-kiwdhiahak kitihk- 


watim. oma k-dsindkusiyan, dkusi wistah isindkusiw,” itik oki piydsiwa. 
tipwd sipwihtiahth ; ati-wipinik piydstwatsistwanthk. dkwak dkutah 
lahiwaw ch-kih-néwu-tipiskayik, dkuspihk Gsa bhi kis-ohpikiw Gh-piydsiwit. 


Li 


me disimowin, 
° ’ a ° a a - 
‘ , oo va 


‘ . Z 

Once upon a time, of old,there were ten men. ; 

Again, they fled, saying’ “That Windigo would destroy us all.” 

As they ‘went away, they. took with them 4 yotng girl, their younger 
sister. Off alone somewhere they went and built’their dwelling. And off 
there they stayed. And there for a long time they must have been bringing 
up their sister. Finally they set up in the ground a tall tree, and in it they 
built a lodge, making a kind of nest, in which she then had her dwelling. 


_ Then in time that pure maiden must have seen all manner of things in her 
“dreams. Then, presently, she knew(|that she could fly. And.there was a 
- little boy, a brother still younger than this young woman. 


» 


Then she said to her younger brother, “I shall. gather berries.” 

“Big sister, but where will you find any berries? It is winter,” said 
the little boy. ; ° . 

“Little brother, not by any chance shall I fail,” she said; “For I 
shall fly,” said the young woman. 


Then teally the young woman dressed herself and set out and flew 


. to another Jand. Really, when she arrived there across the sea, she began 


' - te gather berries. She arrived there exactly at noon. She began to gather 


saskatoon berries. When she had filled one of her berrying baskets and 
was setting about filling the other, suddenly a Thunderer’s roar was heard. 
It frightened her out of her senses. When she awoke, to her surprise, a 
youth was raising her to her feet. .She was'very glad, * * * * * * 


Towards evening, she went home. So really, she brought berries. 


‘When she arrived at:their dwelling, she set about stewing the berries. 


Her elder brothers were very much pleased when she gave them the stewed 
erries. . a 


249 ° , 
“Where can our sister have got these berries?” asked the youths. 
They marvelled at this, that in winter they were eating fresh berries, 
_ and because that young woman always had her dwelling up aloft in the 
“* tnest. As soon as the young men got up, they went away, for every day 
~ they, did nothing but hunt, for this was their work, to hunt every kind of 
‘creature. Again the young woman came down. . 
: ” Again she said to the boy, her brother, “I am going berrying again,” 
gaid the young woman. - ( 
Accordingly, again the young woman set out, flying. Again she 
arrived in the Iand across the sea. Again in the place from which the had 
taken berries, she set about her berrying. Behold, when again she had 
filled one berrying basket, again the Thunderer’s noise was heard. Again 
‘he frightened her out of her senses. Again she saw, when she came to, 
that youth whom she had seen, * * * * * * * * * * * *# # 
They stayéd there all day, for éhe liked that youth, ( 

Towards evening again she made ready to return home. She went 
home, again flying. When it was nearly dark, she came to their dwelling. 
Again she set about stewing berries. Again she went up aloft. ‘hose . 
young men were always very glad when they had berries to eat. 

As soon as the next day broke, again they went hunting. As goon as 
her elder brothers had departed, the young woman came down again, to 
attend to their clothes and their moccasins. 

“Onee more I shall go a-berrying,’”’ she must have told her little 
brother. , 

. Accordingly, again she went forth. Again she arrived at yonder 
place; she set about berrying where twice before she had found berries. 
Again when once she had filled a berry-basket, again the Thunderer made 
himself loudly heard. And when again suddenly she had regained her 
senses, when she had come to,* * * * * * * * * * * * *% *% 

Towards evening, again she took home berries. Again she set about 
stewing them. When she had stewed the berries, she went back up into 
her nest. When they arrived, the young men marvelled that every day 
they ate fresh berries. . ; ; 

They said, “Whence does our sister get freshgberries?”’ 

' Again, as soon as day had dawned, they set out, having eaten. Again, 
when every one of them had departed, the young woman told her little 

| brother that she was going off once more. Accordingly, once more she 
| set out and flew. When’ she arrived there where she had been gathering 
| berries, just as she began.to pick, again, the Thunderer began to give bi 


sound. Again the young woman was frightened out of her senses b 
‘sound. And when she came to, once more she saw there the youth: 
youth was very glad that the young woman always came thereto him. 

* LC * * % * * % *~* * Though she arrived 4t their dwel- 
she was not at all able to climb up to the nest in which.she lodged. 
Whenever she tried to climb’ she failed. She needs satdown by the door. 
“What can be the matter?” she thought. The fact was, no doubt, that this 
young woman was so treated by the Higher Powers of purpose, because she 
was théught too much of by her elder brothérs, * * * * * * 
As soon as the eldest brother arrived at their lodge, he must have 
if young sister sitting there, * * 


* * * Fredid not even go in, so shamed was that youth. He was deeply 
grieved. Yor they kept their sister very carefully; * * * * *%  ™ 
* 4 # 4 * % *% * When the next ane arrived, as soon as he saw 
her, he turned back. All those young men left her, because she had too 
much shamed them by what she had done. When dawn had almost come, 
the young woman bore her child. Then she stayed there; she had with 
her only her Jittle brother, that boy. ee ; - 

When they had been alone twelve days and nights, she spoke to him as 
follows; for that wornan’s child was a boy: ‘Take care of your nephew; I > 
am going to gather wood,” she told her little brother. 

She took from him all his clothes; she hung them up high, out, of his 
reach, for, “I shall try to go away,” that young woman must have been 
thinking. - ae 

So, when she came to the grove of trees, she fastened her-sleeve to a 


_ tree; she placed an ax there; she made an effigy of a human being, 


“When that boy who is here says to you, ‘Sister!’ then, ‘Yes!’ you will 
say to him,” she told that effigy. 

And so in this wise she abandoned her child which not long before she 
had borne. Then presently, when for a long time he had rocked the babe, 
it began to ery. The boy called. 

“Sister, my nephew is crying!" he called. : 

“Wait a bit! Iam in the midst of gathering wood!” he was answered 
by that cfigy which had been made, 

t Jast darkness came. In time they were almost freezing. They 
wept, he and the babe with which he had been abandoned. When ‘the 
fourth night had passed, suddenly the Thunderer’s Joud roar was heard. 
Suddenly, there he sat. ' . 

“Truly, you are in a sorry) plight, my brother-in-law,” the Thunderer 

“said to’ him; “Your sister by this time has taken another husband,” the 
Thunderer told him; “But I have come to fetch this your nephew. In any 
case you would not be able to/take care of him,” he told him. 

Then that ‘Thunderer-togk down for him hig clothes which had been 
hung ‘high. As soon as he had put them on, the other took away that 


"infant. We too went forth. When he had taken up his snowshoes, he saw 


“4, . PJ « ” 
wt? the way along which his sister must have departed. He ran on, all day. 


LO 


\~ 


Presently, towards evening, there in a hollow of the Jand, he spied a grass 
hut. He approached it. . .  * ; oO 
“There, this must be my sister’s dwelling!” he said. . 
_. He went inside. He built up the fire, When he had built up the fire, 
hie lay there. As he looked about him, presently, there he saw his gister’s 
breast, which-she must haye cut off. : . 
“Alas, truly she brings me to grief!” he thought; “Now with this I 
could have congoled my nephew that has been taken from me!” he thought. 
Then there he spent the night. In the morning he set out again. Along 


'.the path that his sister had taken from there, he tracked her all the day: 


Again, towards everhing, he saw another little lodge of grass. He entered 
it. He fed the fire. Again, as he lay there, he saw his sister’s other breast. 

Again he lamentdd that his nephew had. heen fetched away. He set out 
in the morning. /Presently, as he went on, he came out upon a place where 
was ry lodge, and “ve saw his sister tannirig a hide. At once he called 
0 her, yoo ! 


° 


‘e 


@ & 7. 


ye 
“Sister!” he called to her; “J have come!” “a ' 

Then that young woman said, “I have never had any younger brother, - 
I have always been alone, as I am,” gaid the young woman. ° 

“Ag for me, truly, my nephew was taken away from me as I came,” 
he gaid. . 

At once the young woman grew angry. She ran at the hoy and struck 
him with ‘an ax, killing him. She chopped him to bits. . 

. But some kind mice took pity on him, decidirg to try to revive that 
boy who had been killed. . 

° Then, accordingly, “I, 1 shall take him away!” said a mouse, one of 

those which are large. 

Accordingly, they attended to him. For of old they had human form; 
hecause by all the Higher Powers they were, aided is why it could happen 
so. Really, they restored him to life, | 

Then, in the morning, that man who-had to wife the young woman 
who was so mad and had slain-her brother, spoke thus to her: “Go feed 
those Old Mouse Women,” he told her. 

Then, accordingly, the young woman went to give them food. When 
she entered, there she saw the boy she had killed. 

“So it ‘seems that these evil old women, have brought him hack to 
life!” she said. 

Then the man said, “Never mind, do not kill him, my wife. After 
all, I ean take him with me when | hunt, ” he told her, 

So the young woman left him alone. Then, accordingly, the old women ‘ 
made their grandchild ready, that he might hunt. 

So, when that man was.ready to go hunting, “Come here, young 
fellow! It would seem you are staying with people,” the child was told. 

Then the child made himself ready, and they set out, as he accom- 
panied that man on his hunt. 

- Although they would come upon some creature’s trail, “Not this one,” 
the other would say to him; “He is too small,” the other would say to him. 

Then really, when they saw the trail of another whose tracks were of 
enormous size, then the man went off pursuing this giant stag, and soon off 
there slew him. When the boy later arrived, the other had almost finished 
preparing the carcass. 

Then the: told him, “Roast this tripe,’ he told him. 

So he roasted it. _ 

When he had cooked it done, he said to the man, Let u us eat it fiom 
either end.”-. . 

- Then, “What makes you say that?” said the man; MOU YOU ; ba but 
a child, to ‘be wanting to eat so much,” he told him. see il 

“But since I have no power of any kind!” said the a 

“Yes, very well,” the other said to him. . 
: Accordingly, as soon as he had cooked done that tripe, they each 
took hold of an end, and ate it. Then, when they had almost eaten it up, 
hhe snatched it away. from the man. 

~ “Come, eat this, Thunderer!” he said. 
.> “Wo, what sort of thing will give its aid to you?” the man said to 
him; “Get to work!” he told him; “Up with you!” he told him. 


252 


Close by there, off to one side, where lay the stag’s head, the man 
took it up by the beast’s pointed horns; he put it on the boy’s back, for 
him to carry. He sank to the ground under the weight. , 

“Look lively!’ he told him; “Get up!” he told him; “Believe it or 
not, though you think yourself of manitou kind, if I overtake you on the 
way, I will kill you; I will stamp you under my snowshoes.” 

So the boy started off. When he had got close to their lodge, the other 
had already come near, and now overtook him.- At once he crushed him 
under his snowshoes. He killed him; he jabbed'the horns into him. Then 
the young woman was very glad that he had been killed before reaching 

‘the place. 2 

Then again those old women who had restored him to life said, “Let 
them try once more to bring him to life!” _ re 

Then, accordingly, that big old woman, that Old Mouse Woman took 
him off with her. They succeeded in bringing him again to life. It seoms - 
that they took a steam-bath whenever they were about to bring him to 
1ié€. . 

Then again, in the morning, “(Go feed our grandmothers,” said the 
man. - ; 
When, accordingly, the young woman went there, the boy was alive. 
“And so they have done it again! _I was glad he had been killed!” 
she exclaimed. - ; wR 
“Never mind, I shall simply take him with me again,” said the min. *- 
Then the young woman left him alone. Then the boy made ready. 
They went hunting. The man came to take him along. Again they set 
out; again they came upon the trail of a stag. , 
“Is this the one?” he asked him, but, “No! He is too small,” the 
other answered. 


When one had left hoofprints of enormous size, this one the man pur- 
sued; ‘You will catch up to me later,” he told him. 

Truly, later, when the boy got there, he had already nearly finished 
cleaning the carcass, ; 
hi Again, “Come, child, roast this; let us later eat this tripe,” he told 

im. oo, 

Then, ‘Let us.eat it again from either end,” he told the man. 
hi Then, ‘‘Now for the second time you say thus,” the other answered 
im. 

“After ajl, as for me, I am but a poor creature,” said the boy. 

“Yes, very well,’’ said the man. _— . 

Then, ‘Let me have the big end, let me eat from the big end,” said. 
the boy. | . ; . 
At last he talked the man into it. So then they took hold of it at either 
end and ate it. When they had but a little uneaten, the boy flung’ it aloft. 

“Come, eat this,” he said, “O Thunderer!” Tg 
_ Now again, off to one side lay the head, and again the man too 
it and put it on the boy’s back. “Again he drove him to his feet, telling 
im, Look lively!” He started out. The man hurried him on with 
shouts. ~ 


be 
“If anywhere I catch you, I will stamp you flat with my snowshoes!” 
he called to him. ; 


t 


tees 


253 


a 
1 


2 \ 
He went off. When he had got near. thé lodge, the other overtook 
him, 
As the other was about to come upon him and kill him, he.cried, 
“Thunderer, kill this one for me! He wants to kill me!” said the boy. 

Then truly the Thunderers made themselves loudly heard. "They 
killed that man who was going to kill the child. Then the young woman 
came leaping out of her dwelling. Again she slew her little brother. 

“If you again restore him to life, I will kill you all!’ she said to those 
old women. | - : 

“Now,” said those old women, “in any case she will not be able to 
kill us.. Let us revive him once more,” they said. 

Accordingly, again they built that in which they always revived him. 
They completed it. When the young woman went.to sce them in the 
morning, and the boy was alive, she tried to kill him. 

Just as she was about to slay him, “This one means to kill me, O 
Thunderers!”’ the boy said again. . 

Truly with great noise the Thunderers were heard. 

‘Now then,” they said to him; °*1 shall needs take you home with me 
aoft,”’ said the one Thunderer; “I have already brought to maturity your 
nephew whom I took, Even as [ look, so looks he too,’”’ the Thunderer 
said to him. . 

So he took him away from there; he dropped him into a Thunderer’s- 
nest. And there, when four nights had passed, by that time he had grown 
to maturity as a Thunderer. 

That is one tale. a 


(27) Why the Dead are Buried 


, Louis Moosomin 
néh-namiskwikdpaw. 
kayds ayisiyiniwak Gmisi kih-pakitinikowisiwak : kohkiyaw kakway 
kih-kitimakdyimikwak, tahtuh kdkway kaé-wapahtamihk, mina dGka ka~ 
wapahtamuht. kahkiyaw kdkway kth+pawdtamuk. ahpioh wakayobsah kih- 


kiskinGhamdkwak kdkway. awdk ohlsi kayds ayisiyiniwal k-dh-kih-mani- | 


towitstk. - 
dkwah nik-dlayohkan. - . $$ . 
kitahtawd yahkih pdyak napiw pdyakuyiwa ulawdsimisah, akwoh 
_ mistah dsah dh-kitimdkdyimal, mina éh-miyu-pamihdt. dkwah kitahtawd, 
wayawitimihk uwikimdkanah dh-atuskdyit, kitahtawi ka-wanihdisik utawd- 
simistwawah. namuya kih-kiskiiyihtamwak, tdnisi isi dh-(sih-wanihatsik, 


BBO ; . ; 


~254 


pawditam dskaw mana Gh-wdpamat ukusisah. 

Kitahtawd pdépuniyikih mana kanawdyimik shi wdkayésah.  dkusi 
tahtuh pikw id avyisiyiniwak kd-mdmustsikdyit, dsay kiskdyihtam awa 
wakayés. ahpih k-tyaskinahtwakut kiskiyihtam. . 

Omisi dsah mana itiw bhi awdsisah: “ ndsisé, dsay mina ninatumik- 
awin, ” ttwdéw dsah, 

ldpwi Gkutah kiy-6histh-pimdtisiw anah awésis. piyisk tdpiskats 
ayisiyiniwah kih-itéyiméw dsah wakaydsah, dh-uwitsdwakanit. : 

dkusi piyisk mihtsdét askiy Gh-uhpikiyikut, dkwah kékats éh-népéwit, 
Omisth ittk wakaydsah : “ dkwah kdkals kikies-dhptkin. wipats ékwa kitah- 
wayawin,” ik dech; “ kéhtéwiy, anuhts kd-wih-nipihk, kikdis méstih- 
hasutsth kénah, dkuspih nika-nipahth, ” tttk dsah ; “ dkutah simak wayawith- 
kan. ‘kiyah dtaik ma, nohtah 1’ itahkan, mayaw wadpamatsih ; ‘ nahtah, 
niwu-tipiskéw namuya ayisiyiniw nika-wapamtk, iskwéwak tipiyak. kiy- 
awiw mina namuya ka~wipamindwaw. kispin wipamitwawi iskwéwak, 
dkusi nike-kutd@waskamikin. koakwé-titah,’ kik-dtéw kohtawiy, wipamat- 
sth,” dkusih ttwdw awa wakayos. 

“ wapahkih ka-takuhtéw kihtawiy, ” itwiw dsah awa wakayos ; “ maka 
nivih-nipahik,” itiw dsah ohi; “ simak takuhtétsi, kih-nipahitsi, way- 
awihkan,” itwéw deah. 

tépwi wiyah kiséyiniw awa dh-pd-matsit, miskawiw wdkaydsa, iiah 
Gh-apiyit. 

“ tanwd nimiskawéw wakayés, ' itwéw deah, Do 

dkwah tépwd nitawi-nipahdw. dkutéh mistikwah utindw, d-si-sik- ° 
watakahikdl. tipwé pé-wayawiyiwa bhi wakayisah. dkwah dkus isi nipa- 
havo. mayaw Shih wakaydsah éh-nipahimiht, aw Gskinikiw wayawi-kwask- 
uhtiw, > : 
 “ Gwakw dtsik awa nohtawiy 1” itwéw deah. 

dkwah, “tandhki, uskinikiw, k-6h-isiyin ?” 

“niy oma, nohiah !" itwiw dsah; “ wakayods d-kih-kimutaméask, 
k-6-kih-wanihiyin,” itwéw dsah awa uskinikiw. ; 

Gkust chatwit, awa kisdyiniw, “ dyimdts niwdpamaw nikusis [" ttwéw 


ah. « 
' © néhtah, 6m pikuh pitsi-naydmiyin, ” itwiw dsah awe uskinikiw. 
lapwé kiséyintw ukusisah wiwahdw dsah, dh-naydmat. 
vi ‘“Skwoh dkuté niwdw piku kik-ch-ayiwépin,”.idéw dsa bhtawiya awa 
uskingeen. ‘ 
gaping awa kisdyiniw néyawiskésutsth ayiwdpiw d-nayohisikal.2 mitunih 
misteahi kustkwotiyiwa, paskats dsa ustikwdnithk dh-tahkupisut,’ iyikuhk 
dh-miywdyihtahk ukusisah ch-wdpamat., uhpimd wahyaw manukéw dsah. 
 ndw-tipiskaw namuya nika-wépamikwak ayisiyiniwak,” itwéw dsah. 
lapwi kisdyiniw usk-ayah papdh-nidhidméw apahkwasun mina apasuyah 
néiu. dkwah dsah uskinikiwoh: utindw, aka tséskwa iskwiwah dh-dpatsih- 
dyit; ayisk dsah kayds ki-kandtisiw ayisiyiniw, naydstaw kandtse-dskihk 


1 The prefixed particle is doubtless wrong; perhaps read kilsi-, which seems to be an 
allegro variant of (4) kitah-iai-, kit-dsi, i.e. kilahe, tah- : “that, in order that,” plus tath- : 

thither, thus,” and (b) kitisi~, ie. ieih- with personal prefix k1-, kit- of second person. 

2 The normal forrng seem to be nayomaw ; “he carries him on back,” nayahtam : “he 
carries it on back,” and, derived from the latter, nayahtsikdw: “he carries on back"; 
but we find also naydhiam, naydhtsikdw, Menomini has nayomdw, naydhtam, but for the 
former also naydhdw. - : : 


255 


éh-kih-ayat. mdmaskdts dkwah kanawdyiméw uphimd ukusisah awa kisdy- 
iniw ; ndéé-tipiskdw ayisk itik kita-ka-kanawdyimdt. 

mwudhtet nistu-tipiskaw dh-kanawayimat, dh-nipdl, kayahtd, “ nohtah, 
dkus distk dna dké wihkadts kd-wapamiyin [" itwiw awa uskinikiw. 

dsay apisis pikuh ki-sdkiskwdw, askihk éh-kutdwaskamikit. 

dkust dsa mina kihtwam, “ ékust és-dnih namuya wihkdts kitah-dpisisin 
ayisiyintw !” itwéw dsa awa uskinikiw; “itémaskamik kita-nahinaw 
ayisiyiniw, tepthk uhpikihitutsth |!" itwéiw, iskwdydts dh-pikiskwdt awa 
uskinikiw, : 

maka wiya awa iskwiw! namuya dsa uhtsi wipamdw ukusisah, dkus 
éh-isth-niptytt. . 

dwaku pdyak dtayohkdwin. 


Of old men were placed here on earth by the Powers in this wise: 
they were pitied and befriended by every kind of thing, by as many things 
as are seen, and by the things that are invisible. They dreamt of every 
kind of thing. Even the bears taught them things. That is why the old- 
time people had manitou power. . 
Now I shall tell a sacred story. ; . . 
~~ Once upon a time, long ago, a certain man had one child, and it seems 
that he dearly loved him and took good caré of him.’ Then at one time, 
as his wife was working out of doors, suddenly they Jost their child. They 
could not make out how they had lost track of him. They were greatly 
distressed at having lost their child. The little boy had -been their first 
child, and the only one. They did not know how they had Jost him. 
Having made inquiry everywhere in vain, at Jast they gave him up. 
Now I shall tell of the child, how he managed to stay alive. He 
came to some place or other; it appears that a bear had stolen the child. 
-Soon he went about with the bear in summer-time. _ 

Then at one time that man said, “Perhaps after all my son is alive!”’ 
- he would always say. . 

Every now and then he would dream that he saw his son. 

Then in winter-time the bear would take care of the child. As often 
as anywhere men performed their worship, at once the bear knew it. He 
knew even when a pipe was filled.for him. 

This was what he must have said always to the child: “Grandchild, 
again I am being invited,” he must have said. 

So in this way the child stayed alive. In time he looked upon the 
bear, his companion, as a human person. 

‘Then finally, when the latter had brought him up through many years. 
and he was near to manhood, the bear said to him, “Now you have almost 
grown up. Soon now you will go outside,” he must have told him; “Your 
father, this coming spring, when the last of the snow is about to melt 


‘iLe., it was his mother who had violated the command; either the tale is laconically 
told or I missed a sentence above, 


83186-175 ae 


256 


away, then your father will kill me,” be must have told him; “Then at 

once do you go outside. ‘And 80 jt 18 you, my father!’ do you then By Lo 

him, as soon as you see him; ‘My father, for four nights let people not sec’ 
mc, women at least. You and my mother, too, I shall not see. If women 

see me, | shall sink into the earth. Try to do this,’ you will say to your 

father who you see him,” spoke that bear. 

“Tomorrow your father will come,” the bear must have said; “Dut 
he will kill me,” he must have told the lad; “As soon as he arrives and has 
killed me, then do you go outside,’ he must have said, 

Then truly, the old man, for his part, as he came that way on the 
hunt, found the bear where it was staying. 


ep rulys I have found @ bear,” he must have said. 


Accordingly, he went to kill it. ‘There he took a long stick and. prodded 
the hole that was in the ground. Truly, the bear came forth. Then, 


_ accordingly, he killed it. As soon ag the bear had been killed, that youth 


leaped out from the hole. 
“And so this is my father!’ he must have cried. 
Then, “What do you mean, youth?” 
“Tt is T, father!” he must have said; ‘Because the bear stole me from 


yon, is why you lost me,” the youth must have said. 


MS 


“When he said this, then the old man must have said, At last I see my 
son?” . 

“Father, there is only this, that you must carry me on your back, " 

said the youth, 

So the old man took his son on his back and carried him. 

“And until we get there, only four times you are to stop and rest, ” 
zaid the youth to his father. 

So whenever the old man; wearied under his burden, he rested, with 
his load on his back. The latter was very heavy, the more so, 43 the old 
man had tied the strap round his head, so glad was he’ to see his son, Then 
far off to one side he set up a tipi. - -oo 

“Por four nights people are not to see me,”’ he said. 

So the old man went about borrowing unused tent-covering and four 
unused tent-polus, * * * * * * * % % * *% 4 * Tha way to 
cause wonder then the old man guarded his son, away from the camp; for 
he had told him to guard him for four nights. : 

When he had guardéd him for exactly three days and nights, as he 
slept, suddenly, “Father, and 80 you are nevermore to see me!” called the 
youth. vt 

Already his head was 
was sinking, | 

_ Then once more, “And so then, it appears that never again shall a 
mortal man come hack to life!” said that youth; “Under the ground man 
shall be Jaid away, as the generations go on!” said the youth, speaking for 
the last time. 

But as for the woman, she never again saw her gon, who in this wise 
now had died. 

That is one sacred story... 


but a short way above the earth, into which he 


257 


' (28) The Origin of Horses 


; Coming-Day 
ké-kisthdw-pihtukdw. 
kitihtawé d-mihtsititsik ayisiyiniwak, “payok ukima&w utawasimisoh 
nistuh, napiwak, nisu aydudwak iskwiwah, usimimdw du uskinikiw 
miyusiw. dkust nomuy dwiya ayduiw iskwiwa ; maka mistaht kutimdki- 
yimik kahkiyaw “ustisah, witimwah ; lapiskats awdsis dkust pamihdw, 
usim dh-kitimakdyimiht, nistu mikiwahpah ma-mdskuts dkutah Gh-pihtukdt. 


ikusi kitahlawih—uslisimdwa 6h ustdsah mistahi kitimdkdyimik ohi 
witimuah —ékwah mituni Gh-uskinikit, kilahtawah Gh-pihtukdét 6h Gstdsah 
uslisimaua unkiythk, potih pay iyakwapiw aw iskwiw. 

dkuat G-uith-wayawit, “ tsdalwa, 1” tik witimwa ; “ mitsisuh,” itik. 

dkusi asamik. d-kisi-mitsieut, d-wih-sikahukut, pasikow, d-wih-wayavit. . 

“ kiui-stkahutth bma 1” itik uitimwah. 

“ usdm kipdyakwapin,” itdw. 

dkusi pasikow aw ixkuév, iskwabtamihle ah-nipawit, ah-kipiskawat 
witimua, | 

5mis,itdw : “ nilim, | k-oh-kitimakéyimitan, é-wih-wihtamalan, kit-oh- ’ 
uwilsimusimiyin,” itiw, “ ayoudkés ka-kitimakdyimitin,” itéw. s oo 


x 


“ namuya 1" ttwéw aw uskinikiw ; “ usdm tapiskats nikawty niléyih- 
tin tahtuh k-Guitimuydn. nisdkwdyimun,” iliw witimwoh; “ kiyam 
nika-wayawin 1” : 

’. dkust wayauiw aw uskinikiw. ; 

Gkusih mis itiyihlam ac iskudw: * mishots uthtamawalsth ustdsah, 
ta-kisiwadsiw niuitkimakan,”’ tdyihtam; “ nitsawdts nka-wihtamawdw ni- 
vikimdkan,” itiyihtam ; “ nitsawdls maywds wihtamawdl: ustdsah, niyo 
nko-wihtamauliv, ” Mduihlan. . , 


ah-pihtukayit uvakimdkana, Gmis uaw: “nivikimakan, numuya dkus 
d-kih-itiyihtaman, kisim k-oh-k itimdkdyimak. anuhts dh-qihtukdt,-nkak- 
ndtsimik ta-nétsiikawit,” tliw; “ milunth nimdmaskdtan diy-isi-Kitusit, 
k-bh-uihtamdtan. © Gkust numuya dkuwah nika-kth-kitimadhkdyimdw kisim,” - 
tliw, ¢ oo . 
sdmak pakwitam awa napiw. 
“namuya dkusi d-kih-tiyihtaman, ‘ kak wa-kitimakdyim nisim,' k-oh- 
ititan mdna,’’ ttdw,- 


dkust aw oskintkiw ni pdwisiw G-kth-itikut witimwa. . namuya wih-ay- 
ituhtiw. : . 
“lanwd dtukd akus Gh-itéyihtahk nisim, dkwah aha kd-pihtukdt,” 

iléythtam aw Gstésimaw. 
mika kisiwisiw Gma k-itikut wwikimdkana, kilahtawd wihkdts “éh- 
ituhtat aw bskinikiw, d~wih~pihtukat, wapamik ustésch. mohkuman utinam, ., ~' 
“ nikanipahéw nisim,” éh-itdyihtahk. - d-pa-pihtukéyit, é-wih-tahkamédt, ~~. 
asdpayihow . aw uskintkiw. ‘tépiythk apisis. pikwéhuk, namuya mmitunt 
pikwataydhuk. dkus isi wayawiyémiw aw uskinikiw, dh-ma-mawimuyit 
witimwah Ghi kd-misimikut. kutakak iskwawak Gh-wa yawitsik moskist- 
awdwak Ghi népiwa, Gh-nawaswalayit usimiyiwa. nawatindw awa ndpdw, 

q 


“ 


258 


G-mitsiminiht. dkust poyow. kiwéhtahiw. 4d-pihtukit wikiwahk, kutakak 
napawak pihtukéwak, éh-kitahamadht. ° 

“ tanihki k-oh-totawadt ustma, dh-kiskdyimtht dh-kitimakdyimat ?” 

disiméw: “dh-kakwétsimdt wilimwah dh-wih-dwitsimusit, dyak odhtsi 
k-oh-tétawak, ” iléw. . 

dkusi aw Oskintkiw Ghtdwiyah wikiythk dkuté pihtukahdw, éh-nandta- 
wihtht. piyisk kinwdsk ayaw, d-wisakdythtahk, 6h dsimimawa ustésah ah- 
pamihikut akwah uwitimwah. nisu ayawiyiwa iskwiwah. dwakunik 
mistahi pakuwdtamwak dh-titamiht oh dskinikiwa witimuwdwa, usdm tapis- 


.kéts ulawasimisiwdwa dy-isi-kitimadkdyimdisik hi. “maskéts ahpoh ta- 
- nipiw, ” iéyihtakusiw aw uskinikiw, dh-dlah-nandtawthiht, piyisk kinwdsk 


Ghkusiw, piyisk kiwdhichéw awa-usima wikiwahk, d-wih-pamihat, “ usim 
Gh-kwatakihiat nohiawiy mina nikdwiy, ch-pamihdtsik nisima," Gh-itayih- , 
tahk ; “* maka dhuti watinehk nka-pamihandn,” Gy-itéyihighk. tapwii: 
pemthdwak usima, awa ké-kih-tahkamai usima nama wihkdls nitawd- 
pamiw, min uwikimakana. napdwihk kaskéyihtamy éh-nohté-wipamat aw 
iskwiw ka-kih-misimat witimwah. “ mik-ituhtén,” didisth uwikimakana, 
dkus éh-pakamahukut, ih-kahkwéyihtahk awa, k-oh-totawat usimah. 

piyisk ati-miyw-dydw aw uskinikiw. . 

“ kéhisindh miyw-aydyani, ahpoh nika-nipahik nistés. miyw-dydyant, 


’ nika-sipwahidn. kiyam pikw id wi-misi-wandtisiyani, ” idythtam aw uskini- 


kiw, Gh-ati-miyw-ayat. 


Gh-nipiyit. “kitahtawd hi ustmimawe wifimwah, d-wih-wipaniyth, ahazGh=” 
na-nipayil, kiskdyiméw é-nohtéhkwasiyit. i. 

mis itiw: “ nitim 1” 

© tandkkih ?” ' 

“mahtih pahkdkinus patéh ékwoh astis dhwoh uskatsthk. ”* 

“ tanis é~wth-tétaman ? ” dtik. ; 

“ nimaskisin &h-pikupayik, é~wih-misahamdn,” iidw. — 

“ pé-kétsikunah ; niya nka-kaskikwatén, namuya wihkdts kika- 
kaskikwwatisun, ahpoh éh-miyémahtsihuyin ; wawis isty dkwah ka-pamihisun, 
dyimats Gh-pimdtisiyan ?”’ itéw ; “ misawats apisis 6ma,” itdw. : 

_  mdka mistahi nohtéhkwasiw aw usiknikiskudw. piyisk miydw ahah 
ké-ndh-ntutamakut witimwah, ékwah manisam aw uskinikiw, dh-uyisahk 
bma pahkékinus. ké-wapamdt witimwah dh-nipéyit, kahkiyaw. dwakunth 
utinam ; upihiatwanah utinéw. a 
_  Gkus isi éh-wayautt, é-sipwahtdt, “ kiydm nantaw ita nike-misi-wandtis-. 
im, misewdts tahkith nikaxpakwatik nistds,” dh-itéyihtahk. 
dkust pikunt itih ist sipwihtéw. 
ayikuhk Gh-pékupayit awa hapéw, namwats wipaméaw usimah. 
6wikimakana kuskundw, “ tiniwd nisim ?*’ Gh-ttat, 

“aspin oma, ‘nika-kaskikwatén nimaskisina,’ dh-itwit, éh-dtah-nah- . 
ntutamdwak, dha d-wih-miyit, piyisk mimiydw tsit-dpatsihtat., dkus dh-isi- ~ 
nahisiniyan, dkus dtukd ninipan, éka k-oh-kiskayimak éh-~wayawit,” itéw. 
____kiskityihtom Gh-sipwihiéyit awa napdéw usima. niawi-wihtamawdw 
dhidwiya, ta-ntundmiht ustma,, dh-itdyihtahk, ayisk Ghtawiya dh-ukimauiytt, 


‘Ghetinayrhtamiyit dténaw. dkusi wayawiw awa ‘kisdyiniw,. ah-wihtahk 


é-Wénihdlstk ukusisah, ta-maémaw6-ntundmiht, é-sthkihkdmut. - -: 
aw uskintkiw asay wahyaw ayadw. itah mistah é-sakayik, dkutah sdski- 


2 . ‘ 
gat oa 


259 


siw. mdkwd-sakdhk dkutah nahapiw. piyisk hawisimow, “aha nika- 
miskékawih' [” éh-atdythtahk, 

dkwah oki ayistyintwak misiwd niuntkéwak. biyikaw: sakghk Gh- 
mundht, nama miskawaw. piyisk tipiskayiw. Go fe, 

tyikuhk mistah ah-tipiskdyik, dkwah sipwéhtéw bw dskinikiw. % ; namuya 
kiskdyithtam taniéh k-dsi-sipwihtdt. dyikuhk minah ‘-othut ap tah 
é-pasahisdytk, é-sakdyik, dkutah mina kawisimow. 

sakahk dkwa oki mina ntunikdwak ayisiyiniwak ; mika asay wahyaw 
ayadw aw uskinikiw. nah-nodhtaw uhtsth waydniwak ka-ntunawatstk, 

kapd-kisik nipaw aw Gskinikiw. tytkuhk dh-utdkusik, dkuyikuhk 
pikupayiw. kitahtawd kd-pdhtahk d-matwd-mdtowiht. dkwah é-wih-kakwd- 
wapamat kd-matoyit, kd-nisitawdyimat ustdsah, dkutah dhispatindyik 
Gh-na-nipawiyit. dkusth ahtsi pikuh kasthtawiw. wiy uhtsi k-oh-matoyit, 
Gh-wanihikut. piyisk d-wth-tipiskdyik, aspin ch-kiwiyit, iyikukk ékay éh- 
péhiawat, wist dkwa sipwihtiw, ah-tipiskéyik. dyaku mina kapé-tipisk 
pimuhtéw. dytkuyk d-wth-waépaniytk, kunt itah kawisimow, ‘‘ misawats 
‘wihyaw niayan akwah,” Gy-itdyihtahk ; “ misawats namuy -dwiyak nka- 
wapamik,”* Gh-itéyihtahk. iytkuhk ‘dh-pakupayit, dsay. spi-kisikayiw. 
“kiyam Gh-kisikak dkwa nika-pimuhtan,” itéythiam. tapwah sipwahtiw. 
nama wihkats mitsisow, aspin kd-sipwahtat. kapd-kisik Gh-pimuhtat, iyikuhk 
Gh-ati-tipiskdyik, mina kunt itah kawisimow. dsay nohtéhkataw. mina 
éh-wépaniyik, dsaysmina. sipwihtiw. namuya maka kiskéyihtam tanich 
tdtuhtit. nama wihkats kih-papah-wapahtam 6m Gskiy. dkusi mistaht 
nohiéhkatdw, nama wihkdts dh-tipiskdyik dkwah pimuhidw, pikw ch- 
kKisikdyik. piyisk diuké wahyow dkwah ayaw, wiya tahtu-disikdw dh-pimuh-~ 
tat, : 


Kitahtawé kiskéyihtam Gh-ytkitsikadwit, ékw ds anth mistah déh-kawéh- 
katusut. nama withkdts ayisk mitsiséw, uhisitaw aka G-wih-nipahat kikway 
ta-mitsit. 

“ yahoh, idpwé miyamay kuntah niwih: “pipahahkatuswn. | nawats kék- 
way ta-nipahikuyan, dkust ta-miywasin. mina dka kakway nipahikuyand, 
niya kikway ahpoh nipahlayani, mina kutak kékway miskamant ta-kih- 
Gpatsihiayan, nikah-kiwan, nanitaw uhtine dn,” ah-itéyihiahk ; * nisa~ 
wats dkwoh kékway wapahtamdni ta-kih-mitsiydn, nka- kakwwd-nipahtan, ” 
itdythtam. f 

maka nama kikway lah-wapahtam. kitahtawd akwah namuya kih- 
mihkawikiw; usim dh-kawahkatisut, pikuh mistike uhisi d-saskahuhiat, Gh- 
nisowahkatusut ékwah. 

Kitahtawa niswaiw a-kth-nipat, dkuyik hk kd-wapamdai pihydwa, “i nke-~ 
kakwé-nipahéw, dkwah kd~mitsisuyan, ” ih-ildyihiahk. tdpwdé pimwdw ; 
nipahdw. utiniw dékwah,° d-po-paskupitdt. kisiwak Gtah ispatindyiw ; 
awasitah wapahtam é-sakayik. 

dkutah nko-kokwd-kapasin, ’ itéyihtam, d-sipwahtdt. 

Gh-ati-sikéwit, ké-wapahtahk mikiwahpis ch-tsimatdytk. . 

“* tapwih nimiywayihtin ayisiyiniwak ta-w jpamakik, " ttéythtam. — 

namwais, ma-mitundyihtam ta-mési-wandtsihikid, ‘dydyaw dkwah kd- 
pimatisiyan ; murh-nipahahkatusuh, ” Gh-itdéythtahk. 


' 2 Preterit, with future particle prefixed. This is not inconsistent with the meaning 


_O€ the preterit: past intent unaccomplished, or ‘past act no longer true; but * the cee 


‘combination is not common enough for me to know its value. | 


- 260 


ow, - - . ; 

ituhléw dkutah, dh-takuhtdt, nama kékway wapahtam wayawitimihk, 
ka-matwa-pikiskwawiht, “ta-tawaw, nosisimis ! pihtuka !” ka-matwéh- 
itwayit notukdsiwa. 

Gh-yihtukdt, awin bhi kih-péyakuyiwa. 7 ok 
. “ésisimis, nésisimis,” dh-tikut, “ manih dh-dyimaniyik téh k-dtuh- 
tit!” k-dtikut ; “ ndtd uhts-dpih,” ick. 

dkwah miydw oht pthéwah. 

““ nohko, awa méwahkan, " tidw. 


“tdpwé, nosisimis ah-atamihit |" itik ; “ dkusi nésisimis undhtah- © 


katéh ! nika-paminawatdw,” itch. : . . 

dh-apisisisiyzt askthkusah k-akutdyit,. dkwa nisu . dh-apisdsiniyikth 
wiydsisah éh-pakastawihamiyit, nisu.mina médnisisah, “ nindhtéhkatah, 
apisis ké-pakahiakuhkdt} nohkum 1!” itéythtam. 


dkus omis itik: “ nodsisé, dyiman itdh k-dtuhtdyin. namuya wihkdts. 


pi-kiwiw awiyak, dkuté dtuhldisth. data mana nikitahamawdwak uskini- 
kiwak,” itwéyiwa ; “ nésisd, nawats ta-kiwdyin, wapahkith. adyiman 6ma 

' tah k-tituhtiyan,” itik. - 
- (vs 


yohd, nohké, usdm gsay wahyaw nitaydn. ahpoh ama kuntah kd- 


nipahahkatusuyén, maka wiya dkutd takuhtdydni, misi-wandtsihikuyani ~ 


kikwayah, ta-miywasin. ispihtsth kuntah ta-nipahahkatusuydén, namuya 
nka-kih-kiwdn, ’’ itéw, 
“héw, nosisimis, néwutipiskwah dtah ayah, maka ka-kiskindhamaién 
kikway, tadnsi tt-dyihtiyan, ” itdk. ; _ 
ce aha’ i? ; - . — 
dkuytkuhk dkwah dh-asamikbut ; dkwah ma-mitsisow. namuya kth- 
kitaw oh iyikuhk k-dsamikut. dkdy d-kih-kitat, itisinamawdw Ghkumah. 
“ndy ! tapwa yikitsikawiw ch-mitsisut nosisim 1? tik. = | 
dkwah éh-kakdskimikut, dm tiéh ké-wih-ituhtét, dyakuh d-wihtamdkut, 
piyisk ékwah é-nikamuhikut. a : 
ik kitahtawih 6mis ttik : “ ndsisé, kindstusindtukd ! kiyam pitah nipah,” 
tik. . we 
. dkust kawisimow. 
iytkuhk ah-pékupayit, “ nosisd, waniskdy dkwa ! mitsisuh ! nikisi- 
_ paminawasun, ” itwdyiwa. a ° ' / 
, dkwah waniskéw. _ Gkusi dh-pd-pakitinamakut oh dtaskihk 
dkwah dh-miisisut. aa . 7 . . os 
piyisk kispow, “ tapwé Gh-apisis mitsisbw nosisimis 1” ah-itikut. 
“ dkuyikuhk nohké, ah-kispuyan mana,” itéw. _ 
dkusi kapd-kisik dkutah ay-ayaw. watdkusiniyikih, kah-mitsisutwaui, 
Gkus Gh-nikamuhikut, iyikuhk dhkéyimikutsih, “ kawisimuh |?’ ah-itikut. 
hit ‘G-Kth-ndyu-tipiskayik, “ haw, dkwah, ndsisd, dkwah-ka-sipwahidyan, ”’ 
itik. 


\ 


sLytwa, 


dsay ndma ka-kiy-isi-miywamahisthut, saydw * néwutipiskwah éh- 
- asamikut shkumah, dsay mitun tahtsipow ; namuy ékwah kaivahkatusow. 
_omis itik ohkumah: “ ndsisé,. ai dma.dkus d-isi-kiskindhamawakik 
uskinikiwak, maka namuya nitépwihtakuk, _k-6-mah-misi-wandtisitstk. 
lapwihtawiyini, kika-miyupayin ; maka sakétsimiskih awa ka-wih-utihtat, 
ka-misi-wandisthtk, ” itik ; “‘ kéyiwihk awa pimiwth, ’) Gheitikut, dh-miytkut 


1 One would expect a different formation, but th i : hakuhkedw 2 
Phe nao exp gph i formation, but the word is common: pakeahtleu iw 


? Unfamiliar particle; perhaps wrongly recorded. 


> 


*, 


a4 ; . 261 


dmiskéhésiwaydnisah'; “ dwakw dwa, nésisé, nduliptskwah kik-dydn. aka 
misi-wandtsthiskih, nohtahkwasiyini, ‘ nimusé, pita nika-pimisinin |’ kik- 
dtaw. ‘aha’ ,’ itiskih, awa kaskikanthk kik-dhaw. ‘ haw, nimusém kédtusit- 
sth, kitus-! niwih-nipdn. wih-wdpahkih, kuskumhkan |’ kik-dlaw awa. 
dkwah awa,” ttik, “ itamihk kika-saniskamdsun, ” itik, dh-miyikut utdsiyan- 
iyiwa Ohkumah-; “ dékust piku ka-ki-sékétsihaw, totamanih, ana kisdyiniw. 
dkwah tsikih thiagyanih, mistik kik-at-dtinién, namuya dh-misak mistik, oma 


kiy-dti-pimuhtéyin2 niswaw nipdyint dsay kika-wapahidn nipiy. nam- .~ 


wits kika-wipahtin tdnté dh-kistpdkamak,” itik ; “ ékust pon-dpihtd- 
kisikaki, dkuyikuhk kisiwak kik-6tihtin anima sékahikan. ta-tahtakwahtsdw. 
kika-wapahtdn apisis dh-ispatsindsik. dkutah kik-dtuhian ; dkutah ‘ka- 
nahapin. ki-nahapiyini, dkutah tstki sdkahtkanthk ka-wapamdw la-pd- 
sakdwat ayisiyiniw Gh-misikitit. tdpiskéts iskwiéw tit-dsthéw. namuya ka- 
wapahtén usitah. pd-takuhtdtst, ‘hd, nisisd, kiwéh ! ka-pd-ndtat kika- 
kiwdhtahdw,’ kik-dttk. dkuyikuhk ta-pd-sdkdwdw d-wapiskisit misatim 
Gh-miyusit. ‘haw, dyakw dwa kimiyitin. kiwdh !’ kik-dtik, dkaya tap- 
wihtawahkan. amis tdhkan: ‘namuya dyakuh ké-ntawdyimak, = kik- 
dtaw.' dkusi, ‘ yah, tapwah dkwah, nosisé 1’ kik-dtik. itéh k-éhtuhtdl kik- 
dst-kiwahtahtk. d-ndtah aspapiwin, ubtsitaw ta-kiwd-téhlapiyin,’ kik- 
Guik, takuhtéydkuh Ngkihk ;. ‘ ndsisd, ntaw-dtnah | piktukd | éh-rmikisiwik 
aspapiwin,’ kik-dtik.\eainamant, sakélsimiski, ta-pé-tuhtéw anik ana 


“misatim. ‘ulin; wiydhpis’ kik-dtik. uydhpitateth, ‘téhtapi 1! kik-dttk 5 


1 
‘Kiwah !' kik-dttk.  sakétsimiskih, téhtaplyini, with-dtah-sipwdahldyini, 
iyayaw sdkahikanihk kik-tsi-sipwahtahik ana misatim. mama ka-kih- 
sdkuhdw. piyisk ta-pahkupiw. dkuyikuhk kié-pdé-pékupdt Ieee misalim ; 
dyakw dna ka-misi-wandlsthisk,”’ itikk; “ dka@ tépwaéhtawdhkan,” ick ; 
“ndyutipiskwah dkutah kik-aydn. kispin’ tapwdhtawiyint Gma_k-dtitdin, 
dkus dna ta-sakétsihat, kispin ndutipiskwah dkutah ayayant, maka anima 
k-dspatsindsik nahapiyini, pdtsdstamuhtdtsih, dk dnima tapwdhtawats: dma 
_k-dtitan, ka-kihkihkimik. ‘nya, pihtukd 1’ kik-dtik. ‘kiya nikan pih- 
tuka'!’ kik-dtaw, ispih sakétsimatsih, wih-pihtukdlsih, ati-pthtukdtsth, om 
ohtsi mistsikus kik-ohpéskwahamwén uskutdkay. ka-wdpahtin usitah. 
tapiskéts misatim usitah k-dsi-wdpuhlamwan. ‘way ! tdnis awa nimusim 
dy~isindkwaniyikih usitah |’ kik-dtaw. ‘ tanist dsindkwahkih, nésisd ? 
_Gh-lsi-wapahtaman ?’ kik-dtik. ‘dha’ ! tapiskots misatimuskasiyah dsinak-' 
wahkih kisitah,’ kik-dtdw. nésisé, maéyakwam kakwdé-wdpahtam usitah. 
kispin wapahtamatsi, dkus Gni ka-sdkétsthaw. maka aka wapahtamani, 
kika-sdkétsthik,” -itik ; “ maka wépahtamani usitah, dkus dni ka-sdkotsi- 
haw. dkwah dyaku néwutipiskwah kih-aydyanth, dkusi tahtu-kisikaw piyak 
misatimwah kika-miyik. ‘kiwd’!’ kik-dtik. namuya--keghipwihtawdw. 
Gla .wiy dni Ghtsitaw sdkétsihatsih, kikg-mtyik dwakuni misatimuah. kth- 
néu-tipiskakih, dkutah aydyini, ‘hd, nimusé, kitim ana ndpdstim dyokw 
ana ka-pd-natak,’ kik-dtaw. ‘dha’ ,’ kik-dtik. iskwahtémihk kithistdw Gh- 
maydtahk aspapiwin ; dkwah pisakandpiy ka-mdydtan kit-dh-anisképiték. 
dyakunih kika-ntutamawdw. ‘ 6hi kutakah é-mah-miywasikih aspapiwinah, 
pisakandpiyah, dwakuni,’ kik-Gtik. dkdaya tapwihtawahkan. dkutah anim 
Ghist ta-sdkdtsihisk, ata ndutipiskwah paspiyini,”.itik; “ min dyuku 


; | 

1 Later in the story we have the transparent form amisk-chésiwayanis pointing to a 
word *amisk‘ahow : “beaver-owl,” but I dare not correct the present form, because vowel- 
change in the initial syllable is archaic in Central Algonquian in several noun-formatigns. 


? The kiy- is probably an error of record. ; 
. 7 I 


po - | 


Ped 
v 


a 


262 


sdkotsimatsi, ‘haw, dkwah, nosisd, nim ké-pé-nat ,) kik-dtik. t-dti-- 


wayautw. dyakw dnima ka-mayatahk aspapiwin pisdkanapiy tit-dtinam. 
dkusi k-dt-askowadw. sisund sakahikanthk ta-nipawiw. ‘ntim, pé-kapa |’ 
lit-dtwiw. kiyipah nipiy mistaht ta-tsimatéw ; fapiskéts éh-uhtak t-dsindk- 
wan. piyisk ékutah tit-sh-pékupéw napéstim/a-~mihkwawét. ta~pa-kapéw. 


wsuy tit obapa, ta-sdmaskahtitat. min ohi wéstakayah kékadts ta-simaskéh- . 


tiniytwa pa-kapdisth, ‘nah, nésisd, utin’ kik-atik. dékaya tapwiéhtawéh- 
kan. ‘utinamaujn |? kik-dtaw. ki uindtst, - ‘wiyahpitamewin,’ kik- 
alae. wiyohpitdisi, dkuytkuhk akw ‘nah, nosisé 1’ kik-atik. dkaya 
“t ipudhtawahkan, “tahtahin |? itahKan. kispin dyoku tatamani, kika-pim- 
Glisin; ka-sdkétsihdw. .mdka pnaywés taéhtahiskth utinatst, kika-misi- 
wandtsihik dyukw dna, misatims kike-mowik,” itik; “ maka téhtahiskth, 
dkus Gni,ta-pi-lawayin. néiw tpiskwak anima ‘Kiy-ayayin, ékusi, né-mitanaw 
misatimwak ta-paskiyawat/ana kisdyiniw. at dni katimakinawakwawi 
uskinikiwak, dkus ima Asi-kiskindhamawakik, maka namuya nitapwéh- 
taékwak. misahkamik yskinikiwak éka k-oh-pa-kiwatsik, Gh-ati-misi-wandt- 
sthikutsik,” itik ; “ shistahi kaskdyihtam kohtawiy, Rikawiy kistis kitimwak 
aniki ka-bitimakéys iskik, ”? itik. 
dkwah sipwdhtiiw akwah, a-kih-miyikut bhi ka-wihemiyiut, 'ka-sip~ 
wahlat, “ nisw kika-nipan, y ka-kihainkut, niswaw d-kih-nipdt, dkuyikuhk 
wapahtam sdkahikan.. namwdts tipapahtame t Gh-kisipikamayik. - piyis 
istk dkwak’ ay-ihtaw 6ma sdkahikan. piyis d-pin-apihta-kisikak, 6ma 


a wapahtiam. piyisk kd-pd-sikdwdyit sdkahikanihk uhtsi ayisiyiniwah, dh- 
péhstuhtayit. “ lapiskots iakwaro, ” itiyimdw, éh-kinwayik uskutakayiw. - 

dkusi, “ kiwéh,” itik, “ nésisé {” ittk. 

“hd, namuya | aéh-pé-ntawapamitan, ” dldw, 


- mutant, é-pd-sikdwéyit éh-wapiskisiyit misatimwa. : 

“ namuya Gy6k6 kd-pd-natak. kitém ké-pd-ndtak 1” 

“y6, dyuku maka ntéim d-sdékihak ka-miyitan f? , 

“ namuya dyuku !? ttdéw. 

Kah ! dkwah maka uma k-ohtuhtéyan, dkutah ituhlah I niya ! 0 itih. 
.. namuya, nimusé | kiya nikanuhta 1” itéw. 
kthkthkimik. piyisk, wistah bh- kihkihkimadt, piyis tapwahtak, dkwah 

a-sipwahtéyit, “ hd, Maa, ut dst Maqwats pimuhta ?) Gheitikut. “ pimuhta- 


- waki, ta-wipahtam nisitah, ” Gh-itéyimikut, dyakw anima ‘K-oh-itakut, 
dkus hata a be awin bma, ki-misdyiw mikiwahp. 


d-takyhtatsik, 


_ milisiwik, mina pisakandpiy Gh-miywasik, tat-otinaman, tsi-tapatsihtayin 
6 6 ka-miyitan ntim, ta-kiwiyin. ” 


“ha, namuya.! namuya niwth-kiwan ! kutak kitdim ki-pi-natak sian 


- tdw. ’ 
aU piyisk kihkthkimik, “ kiya nikon piduka | ” Ghitikus. wislah hihkth- 
- kiméw.’ piyis mina sakolsimaw. ‘Gh-ati-pahtukayit, uhpaskwaham uskut- 
v, Sakdsiytw ; wapahtam ah-misatimusitdyit, 


4 ch-ati-pihtukat, ' ‘ tanisy dwa tah Mee ?” itdw, 
pote? 1 aoatee, é-wapahtaman tst nisitah ti, " 
. “aha? 

_“' tanist dsindkwahkih ?” 


ern 


asiyik wapahiam, lawayt nahapiw. déh-dtay-itapit, nama kékway , 


“hd, nosisd, kd-pd-ndtat ka-kiwdhtahaw !"’ ah-itikut, asay ka-patsasta- 


bsisd, pihtuka ! dté isi ka-wapahtén aspapiwin ‘ah 


“ 


; , 263 


" tamskéts misatimwak kitay-isisitan Y” , 
"hah ! tapw ds ani kiwapahtin misitah {? dtk, 
Gkusih ati-ta-tipiskayiw. . 
adkwah dékutch éh-aydt, ispih. mistahis Gh-lipiskay, yik, “ nésisd, namuya 
ka-nipdnanaw, kik-Gy-dtsimuyahk, ’ ’ dtth., 
_ “ éha’ | pita nka-wayawin, ” itéw umusima. 
aékust wayauiw. dkwah shkumah uldsiydniyiva itamihle bd d-sakan- 
iskamdsut, dkwah -anthi amisk-chosiwaydriisah dyakunth waskikanthk 
sdkuyahkindw. pihtukaw dkwah. dkusi akwah apiw. 
dkwah, “ dkwah dtsimuy (7 ith. 
akwah ay-dtsimow. sma ha-pél-pa-pimuhtt dyakw ah-ay-dtsimat ; 
- namuya dtsiméw anihi notukistwa. _ pryisk uma k-dsi-wapamat dy iy 
dtsimow. piyisk pon-Gisimow. _“ 
dkusi, “ dkwah niyay !itwiw awa kisdyiniw, dkwah éh-dtsimut. 
ki kapd-tipiek dkwah ayakiv alsimow, “ haha’ !” Gh-ttdt mana au ‘Oskini- 
7w. . “ 
piyisk nohtahkwastw. mo, 
‘ nimus6; nika-pa~pimisinin ! dkusi k-Gsi-nituhtatan 1 a, itéw, 
- “ Gha’ 1” —nipatsih, ayis ta-nipahikut ohi kisdyinined. 
dkust dkwah Ppimmisin. 
“ haw, ’! itiw* thi tah kd-sékuyahkinat ;, is dw: “ nnohtahk- 
wasin | niwth-nipan ! kah-kitus awa bisiyiniw,, Kau tiski 1 ‘wih-wapahkih, 
kuskunihkan !?.ttéw. , 
¥ Ghe { ” va 
an “akusi dkwah ah-nipat wiya. dkwah awa kisdyiniw dh-ay-dtsimut, ; 
_* nosisé 1” Gtdtsith, “way 1" Gh-itikut shi amisk-dhdsiwayanisah, “ dta 
 wiya ts kimiyuhtawin 2” “tha? 1” dheitikut. ; 
Coe na-nipaw wiy dw oskinikiw. .iyikuhk é-kiskaychtapk  Gawth-andipahk, aw 
‘ oskinikiw dmatuwihk skwaskuniyihk* chi ch-tsdh-tsahkatahukut. dkus isi 
pakupayiw ; waniskdw. vA oe, . 
' dkusi wapantyiw. 4, maninakisk way-apn téwaw ? UMUSOMA, ss ee 
tyikuhk kékats Gpihtah, ékuyikuhk kutak dspapiwin miyik. 
“hd, nésisd, kd-pd-ndtat ntim otah papain nipawiw, Raglitden- 
astim,”’ itik, 
é ha, nameuya dyako kah-pd-natak 1” itaw. 
ros Hhah 1... ' 
. Gktist haw: ‘dh-astdyit 6m aspapiwin, dkwah mina ch-dtsimustakul, dha - 
ta-nipdt, ah-itéyimikut. piyis mina tipiskayiw, pisisik Gh-atsimuytt. {| 
dyikuh mina é-nohtéhkwasit, “ nika-pa-pimisinin,”’ itdéw. 
\ kawisiméw mina, dsay mina Gh dkutah ch-ahat. 


| 
| 
} 


“kah-kitus ! niwih-nipan ! wih-wapahkih, , ka-kuskunin !” itaw. | 
Gkusi ch-nipat,  nodsisi 1” dtikutsr, { way 1” ch-itat away ka-kanaw- || 
itipiskwat. 4 iv 


s 


»  — tytkuhk a-wih-oapaniyik, dkuyikuhk ming kuskunik. akusi Gh-wanis< 
ait, 
yo tytkuhk a abut sity, Gkuytkubk kutak mina aspapiwin miner 


© If correctly recorded thia shows-4us the form of the preterit corresponding to iid to idea ; 
tive kwaskunik: “the other rouses him.” The lengthened. form of t! 
or Fru , would be normal for archaic reduplication, kakwésku-. 

wo (erhaps read uyapihtaudw ; one expects uldy-apihtaudu, M-preferit with subject 


e stem,- k 


; ct 


at 


- 264 a 


-v + ‘ 


“ha, nosis, dyokw ani ! kiwé! éhwah waiwaskisiwipiwaydw kimiyitin. | 


“ namuya 17 itdw, as 


_ dkusi kaw étinamiyiwa aspapiwin. dkusi mina éh-dtsimustdkul, aha 
ta-riipat, Gh-itiyimikut, kapd-kistk Gtsimustak. piyish tipiskdw, tahkeh éh- 
itsimustikul. piyis mistaht tipiskiyiw. 

iyikuh mina é-nahtahkasit, dsay ‘mina kawisimow, “ nah-naskum !” 
aheital hi kd-waydskisikushiwayanisah ; “ kah-kitus t niwth-nipan | iyikuh 
mina ka-kuskuyiyin, dkuyfkuhk ka-kuskunin 1” itaw.. 

dkusi ah@duisimut/ namuya kiskiyihtam awa kiséyiniw éh-ah- 
fitstmustaual ahi amisk-ohosiwaydnoh, \“ dyakw Gwa uskinikiw ka-kah- 
kitusit," Gh-itayihtahk ; “ tapwad nama\mayaw -nipiw, ” dh-ildyimal Gh 
askinikiva, “ nistulipiskwah dkdy dh-nipat,” ch-itéyrhtahk, tahkih Gh- 
Alsimul. . , , ; 

tyiluhlfitka é-uih-udpaniylk, dsay mina kuskunik:. dlus ch-waniskdts 
likuah lafd aPitsimut awa kisdyiniw. | . : 

iiti-likkdyik, piyis. h-Gkwa-kistkayik, dsa mina péyak aspapiwin 
ulinam. \ ; 

“hah, dyakw anih;y nésisad ! kiwd ! dkwah usdwisitw niém. dyakw 
luk ka-pti-nitat. Kiwé dkwah ! mistahi kwatakihtawak kohtawiy kikawiy 
kistis, dh-kotawdyimiskik,” itik,  , , 


liwd | mistahi kwatakihtawak kitotémuk, h-pikiskatiskik, ” tik. 


“hah, namuya, nimusd ! namuya éwaku ka-pdé-ndtak,’ itéw. 
tikusi kaw utinamiyiwa’ om aspapiwin. Gkusi mina Gh-maldtsimus- 
takut, “ kihkihk ta-nipdw," Gh-itéyimikut. maka namuya ta-kih-nohtahk- 
wasit, i-nah-nindl.; wiya pikw awa kisdyiniw namuya Ghenipdt. dhust 
kapdkisihkwoh dtuimow. piyis mina tipiskdyiw. a Coe 
iyikuh mina G-nohtéhkwasit, dsay mina.’ “ niuth-pimisinin,”? itéw, 
tih-pimisihk, dsay mina Ghi; “ kdh-kitus | -niuth-nipan f-ayikuh mana kde 


‘kuskuniyin, dkuyikuh kuskunthkan," itiw, éh-kawisimut, wiy Gwa, kis- 


dyiniw kapi-lipish éh-Atsimut. ; . ; 
_, tytkuhkséevih-wapaniyik, dkuyikuh kiskinik min chi. piyisk wapan- 
iyiw, a i 7 een 
dkuyikuhk dkwah, “haw, kika-kiwan dkwah, nosisd ! wiistaht kitim- 


‘ 
« 


dkisiwak kohtawiy kikdwiy kistis,” ith ; “ kisdkétsihin, nosisi;”’ ittk ; 
“haw, dkwah wayawitin, ” . ‘ 7 


e dyak oma ka-mayitahk aspapiwin dkwah “pisikandpiy dw-utinamiyit, 
dh-wayauilsik, ki-wipamat chi misatimuch.niwu é-mah-miyusiyit, “ yak 
untk oki, nosis 1" dy-itibut. ; , 
“ kikim ka-pd-natak, " itéw. Ho, 
, hust, * cha? 1" ; : 2 me , 
~ ékwah sikahikanihk ah-ituhtileik, dkutah uhtsi, “nitdém, pd-kapad !”’ 
: kdtahtawd kd-wipahtahk nipiy mistah dh-tsimatdytk, -tapiskota dh- 


uhtiyik, piyis kd-wipamat akutah dy-uhtsi-pikupdyit misatimwah, éh~pi-~ 


kapayit, dh-mihkwawiytt. potth nipastimwah. 


‘ hitw, Gydkw ana, nésisé.! utin.1” 
‘ha, nimuso, utin' 1"? 


lapwd utingw awa kiséyiniw, - ae . 
“hitw, dkwah, nésisd, uyahpis {? — - ; . vor 
“ namuya { uyahpitamawin 1” als me 
laipwi uyehpitiw awa kisdyiniw, . . caarear’ 
. ca ° 
+ ; * a 


* 


265 | 

“hd, dyakw ana, nésisé 1” / 

“ téhtahin 1” 

téhtahik. kawih wih-pahkupdyiwa: 

“yahoh, nitém'! Gh-miyak @nah nésisim ! kapd, d-wih-liwéhtayisk |” 
itwéyiwa, ‘, 

‘tipwd kdun kapadw. ! . _ ; 

“G, nosisd, wahyaw k-ohtuhtéyin. pdéyakwaw pikuh kika-nipdn. itah - 
nipdyoni, dkust kik-dtimikwak misatinmwak. -nsdkihaw awa ka-miyitan. 
nité takusiniyihi kikiwahk, minisdpuy asamihkan. dkwah awa kitém 
pdyakulés mihkwékin tapiskahkan. dkwah tahtuh thtasitwdwi misatimwak 
kahkiyaw ka-tapiskahdwak mihkwdkinus. . dkus dsi-kiskinéhamdlan, nésisd. 
mihtsdt miyahkasikanah kika-ntulamdn, ta-miydhkasamawatsik misatimwak., 


” dékwah dyakunt miydhkasikanah ka-papd-saskamohdwak. ka-witséhkamdak- 


ww given. fs eg 


-wak kiwadhkumdkanak, ta-saskambéhdtstk. dkusih dkutah uhtsih dkwah ta- 


mitsisowak, maskusiyah ta-mitsitsik. namuy dni nthid-mitstsbwak ka-wih- 
kiwéhtahatsik,” itik; “ dkutah uhtst kik-Gkimadwin. niydtinituydku, téh- 


‘tamyant awa kitim, nama kdkway ka-pikwaskakun,” itik ; “ kiwaydsihin 


aisik ani, kdh-pé-utihtat niwikimakan !" itik; “hah, dkust, nésisé ! 
kiwéh 1” 

dkust. pé-kiwiw aw uskinikiw. kapd-kistk dh-pimipayit, namwdats 
wipamiw ohkuma; namuy dkutah aydyiw wikiyiwa. kinwisk uma kea- 
kéh-pimuhtét qihtsdyiw-itéh k-ohtuhtét. tiyikuhk itéh Gh-tipiskayik, che. 
nohtéhkwasit, nihtakusiw, “ nika-nipan,” dh-itdyihtahk. ay-apiw, Gymit- . 
simapikindt Gh étima, “ ké-nakasit, waydsimitst nimusém !" dh-itéyih- + 
tahk. 

kitahtawé kdh-pdhtahk, “ nosiséd, pakitin kitim ! kawisimuh ! déwak- 
wahkak kitimak 1. ké-matwéitwiyit. - 

dkusi pakitindw, dh-kawisimut. sdémak nipdw. dh-mdékwd-nipdl, 
Fitahtawé kd-pd-pitihkwayik, Ghi misatimwah éh-papayiytt. takupayiyiwah, 
Gkutah Ghwdaskdpayiyit, Gmis ist. piyis- poydyiwa dkutah. dkusi mina 
nipdw. tyikuhk ah-pdkupayit, dsay wapaniyiw. pot Ghi kih-pa~pima- 
piyiwa Ghi misatimwah. dkusi: pasikow, Gh-utindl oh utéma.- dkusi éh- 
lahtapit, dh-ati-sipwihtdl, dkuyikuhk pah~pasikuyiwa, éh-pd-pimitisahukut, 
wiya soskwals éh-pa-pimipayit. _ ; 

Gy-utdkusiniyik, dkuyikuhk ka-wadpamdt ayistyiniwah. dkutah 181 , 
téhtapiw. oh oskinikiwak ds.ohi nisiiawdyimik, miywdythtamiyiwa. 

“* maskots misi-wandtisiw !’ kikih-itéyimikawin. - mistahi kwatakih-. 
tawak kéhtdwiy kistds,”’ itik. . . 

“haw, kiwd 1 shpimad ta-mdénukdwak néhtawiy. «,iyikuhk wapahtamam 
uhpimé mikiwahp, dkuyikuhk nk-dituhtan,” itéw; ‘ nantaw ta-kakwd- 
uhtinam minisah nohtawiy dkwah miyahkasikanah. kispin namuya mihisdt 
aydw, kahkiyaw k-ahtahtikih mikiwdhpah ta-ntutaméw miydhkasikanah. 
mina ta-kakwétsithkimiw mihwdkinus nantaw tit-dyawiht, ta-nitutamdt,” 


iliw Ghidwiya ; “ haw, dkusi ntawi-wihtamaw nohtawiy,” itdw. 


dkusi kiwdépahtaw aw uskinikiw, dh-ituhtdt Ghiikiséyiniwo., 
“ kiséyiniw ! kika-miywéiyihtén ka-wih-dtsimustatan. pdyahtik nituht- 


-awin,” itiw; “kayds ké-wanihat kikusis, anuhts niwapamaw.  Gmisi 


kitik : ‘ patotd ta-~manukdéw. kisi-manukdtsi, maskéts ihtakunwa minisah i, 
ot 7 : + ° “oe 
1Perhaps nitém: “my horse,” is vocative; the inflexion of miydw: “he gives (it, 
him, them) to the other’ does not show. the gender, number, person, etc., of the thing 


st 


266 9: j 


4 


. ‘ ~ > _ : a { - 
dkuléwah t-osthidwak’,” itdw; “ ‘Ghwah mihkwakiitus ta-kéh-kakwat- 


- sthkdmow, ta-ntutamdt. dkwah kispin miydhkasikanah tsikawdsis aydtst, 


min dkutowahk ta-papd-niutamaw kiydm. mthtedt ta-kakwdéh-aydw,’ kitik. 
‘dytkuhk wapahtaméni mikiwahp, nik-dtuhtdn,’ itwiw kikusia,” itdw ; 
“Gh, dkust 1” 

a, miywiythtam awa kisdyiniw. 

“ notukdsiw, niaw-disimustaw kikusisinaw, usima|dh-takuhtdyit | kut- 
akah uskintkiwah ta-wisdémdw, 6ma kikinaw ta-ntaw) ndnukatsik uhpimd, 
apisis kitayananaw mihkwdkin, nka-papd-ntutaman, mina miydhkasikanah. 
ki-wihtamawatst kikustsinaw, minisah sépupatahkan, ” itdw. , 

dkus d-al-sipwihtdt awa kisdyiniw, dh-papd-ntuiamdt dkwah. 

_Gkhwah awa é-ntawi-wihtamawat ukusisah, “ nkusis, takusin kisim, dh- 
wapamiht, ‘ uhpimaéh ta-mdnukéwak,’ dh-itwdt dsah, uskinikiwak kutakak 
ta-wisdmatsik.” , . , 2. 

miywayihiam aw uskintkiw, min ok iskwdwak, witimuwfiwa d-pmatistyit 


| ékusi niawi-manukdéwak 6hpimd. iyikuhk dh-kisukdtsik, ah-kth-nahasta- | 


suisik, dkuyikuhk akwah awa kisdyiniw pdtdw ohi ka~papd-ntutamal. mitun 
ah-kisukdisik, dkuyikuhk nah Oskinitkiw pdy-ituhtéw. nikatdw utdma. , 
dkwah dh-pihtukdt, ah-miyahkasikdwiht, miywdyihtamwak- ok dyisiyiniwak 
Gh-takusiniyit uskinikiwa. potih tahtu kdkway kd-niawdyihiahk astdyiwa, 
ékwah kisdyiniwa dh-ntumal, Ghd minsdpuy ta-mitstyit, mina ta-pihiwaytt, 
éh-kiskinGhamawét Shidwiya Gma minisdpuy umusdma dh-niminamawéayit, 
min dh-taskunikdyit, maka tahtw tah k-dpitestk dh-mitsitetk Ohi minisdpuyah. 
namuya ntumdw. oki kd-kih-tahkamikut ustdsah ; namuya pdy-ituhtéyiwo, 
Gh-astahat, dh-kustikut. dkus dh-kisi-mitsitsik minisah, dkuyikuhk dkwah_ 
wayawiw, dh-ndiat uldma. dkwah dh-pé-kiwihtahat, kahkiyaw dh-pdy- 
askékut misatimwah, mistaht miywiyihtamwak ayisiyiniwak, nama wihkdts 
Gkutowahk éh-kih-wapamatsik ohi misatimwah. “mistahi maimaskdtdwak 
Gsindkusiyit ; ayis dkwdydk. wipamdwak. 


dkutah ah-takuhtahat, dkwah hi miydhkasikanah d-saskahahh, tapiskots 
Gh-tisamanihkdt,’ dh-miydhkaiamawat' misatimwah, taht Shi uskinikiwa 
Gkut dh-aydyit, “ witsthkamawik ; oht miydhkastkanah saskamuhihkuk 
misatimwak, ” ah-itdt. _ - 

lapwd wits6hkamak. iyikuhk dh-tipiskadyik, kisi-atuskdtdwak. dkwa 
mina éh-wépaniyik, Gkwah mihkwékinus 6ma dh-tépiskahdisik kahkiyaw 
chi misatimwah, utéma ohi ndpdstimwah péyakutds tyikuhk ah-tapiskahdt. 
dkus Gh-isi-pakitindt, nma.wihkdts wahyaw papd-mitsisdyiwa ; ayisk dkwah 
mitsiwok maskusiyah misatimwak. é-kih-ndwu-tipiskayik, dkwah ntumdw 


nipéwah. ohi pikuh ka-kih-tahkamikut-ustésah namuya gumdw. ispih 
kahkiyaw d-takuhlayit, pah~piyak ah-ati-miydt misatimwah,piyis kahkiyaw. 
ustisah usimimawa nisu miydw. dkwah shtdwiya nisu mina, pdyak iskundw 
ah-maydtisiyit, “ dyakuni aw dstdsimdw nka-miyaw, "' dy-itdythtahk, wiya 
pik ohi ndpdéstimwah dh-aydwat. dhust dkuyikuhk. ‘ 

_Gkwah pihtéyisk dhwah ntayi-manukdwén ma mikiwahp, dkwah éh- 


miyikut ohidwiyah tit-dkimawit, ta-tipdyimat.kahkiyaw ayisiyiniwa. dh- 


wapaniyik, dkwah kdé-ntumat ustésch wiwiytwah kikih, ohi ka-kih-tah- 
kamikut. os } ‘ 7 


, ayisiyiniwah, kahkiyaw shih mikiwahpah i nasa pah-padyak 


4 
\ 


, . . * ‘ ‘ ‘ . nN ; 
. | tisamanthkdw: “he makes smudge (thick smoke) to drive off ingpcta.” 


te 


’ 
f 


1 


. 


267 


dkwah dh-pihtukayit, “ d, tawdw 1" iw; “ G, kuntah d-tsisimitan 1" - 
ittiw ustasah. 
d-wih-atamiskdkut Ghi witimwa, namuya lapwihtawde, 
mis ttdw ustdsah: “ é-wih-kakwatsimitan, » dtdw. 
“ dha’ | kakwdtsimin, nisim, ” ittk. 
“ tandhki, ‘ nikitimadkdyimik, ’ d-kih-itdyimitén, anima Ka-lih-tolawiyin, 


. kikdts ké-nipahiyin ? kdkway whtai? ” ttdw. - 


e 


nisawdts nohtd-wayawiw aw iskwiw. 

“ya, Gkd wiyahs,! * ttdw awa’ uwikimakana ; ; “kéya wayoui | mah ta~ 
kisdtsimaw nisim, ’ ttdéw. 

ah-kisi-kakwilsimikut, “ hd, nsim, ‘tapwi hilkth-kitimakdyimitin ; ; min 5 
awa kitim kikth-kitimakdyimik. nikih-miywdyihtin dy-isi-pamihish Kitim. 

‘naspits k-dtdyihtaman ; dh-pdyakwapiydn, ah-pihtukdt kisim, ka-kak- 

wdlsimit ah-wih-nitsiikawit,’ ntik. dkwah ntkisiwasin, “taipwii kaké- 
patisiw 1? ah-ttdyimitan, mistah dh-kitimdkdyimitahk, ” itik.- . 

“wah, namuya, nistisd | nikiskdyihtin iyikuhk d-kth-kitimakéyim- 


‘aydk. tanwd dy-ituhidydn, kikiwahk Gh-pihtukdyan, payakwapiw Ieiwikim~ 
akan, kawih d-wih-wayawiydn, ‘ pita milsisu, ’s nick. °‘ usdém kipdyakun,' 
* nitilaw. ‘nd, namuya néntaw é-pdyakwapiyan, ‘iyikuhk th-kitimaktiyime-. 


tGhk,! tapwd ninahapin, Gkwah Gh-asamit. dh- kisi-mitsisuyan, G-wih-* 
pasikéydn, ‘pita ka-sikahutin,’ nitik. ‘ usdm kipdyakwapin, * > nititaw. 
d-wih-ati-wayawiyan, nikipishal iskwahidmihk, ‘nitim, nélsthkawin;’ 
nik ; ‘tapwahtawiyini, iyikuh kd-kitimdkdyimitdn, ayiwakds ka-miyu- 
pamihitn. »  ! nd, muwiéath nka-kth-tolin | usdm nkitimakdyimik nistés, ’ 
nitdw. ‘itap namuya ta-kiskdyihtam,’ nték. dkus is dy-tkatdkapawtt, 
dkusi nipd-wayawin. nndpdwisin, taprsk ote nikawiy dh-itdyimakik kahki- 
yaw nitimwal, tyiluhk éh-kitimakdyimilsik, ” iw} “dyakd uhtsr kinwdsk 


» aka k-Gh-bth~pthtukdyan kikiwahk, d-kih-ndpawihit awe k-apit. hah, ékusi 


dwoku kd-wih-kiskdythtamdn, “fanahhet k-d-kdh-totawit 2? ah-ildyimitan. 
hw, awa otah ké-sakahpisut kiwihtak, dh-miyttan,” idéw. 
“hay hay 1” itwiw aw dstdsimaw. | | 
maka kistwasiw. r 
“ niyd, kiwdtan 1" itdw uwtkimakona. | 
dh-ati-wayawitsik, nat d-takuhidtsik wikiwahh d- kih-sakahpitat awa 
misalimwah, dkwoh itéw. uutkimakana; Mt sdkdwatan uma k-dspatinak, ”” 
tlw, - . } 
dkutah i-lah-nahapitsik, “ mistah dtsik oma! dh-kakdpatisiyin { kiy 
distk 6ma kitdythtaméwin ! nikitimakdyimdadh mist | ! kdkats ka-kéh-nipaht- 
wisuydn 1" itiw, mohkumdn. dh-utinahk, dh- iah-tahkamdat, dh-nipahat 
uwtkimdkana. 7 
dkust kiwdw. Oe an 
dkwah awa aw dskinitkiw hi witimwah, ka-kih-ntutamawdt pahkikinus 
uskintkiskwéwa, dyukunih dkwah miyik ustdsah wbihimakantyiwa, dkunth 
akwoh wiwiw witimwa, 
onuian uhisi aspin k-dshiwik dkwdyak misatinwak dkutah k-bh-Ghpik- , 
dist, 
Gkuat dkwah dy-iskwale dayohkawin, Gtsimuwin? 


1In ordinary use thie word implies shaking hands; I do not know whether this is. 


always the case, 


3 After “using the right word, informant corrects himself, substituting the, wrong.one. 


268 


Once upon a time, in a place where there were many people, a certain 
chicf had three children, sons. Two of them had wives. As for the youngest 
son, this youth was handsome. He, then, had no wife, but both of his 
elder brothers, as well as his sisters-in-law loved him very much; he was 
cared for like an own child, so beloved was he, as he went in turn to the 
three tipis. ; - 

Then at one time—his eldest brother’s wife was especially fond of 
him—when he had become quite a young man, as once he entered his 
eldest brother’s dwelling, there was that woman alone in the tent. . 

When, accordingly, he made to go out, “Wait!” his sister-in-law said 
to him; “Virst eat a bit,’ she told him. ., 

So she gave him something to eat. - When he had eaten, she wanted 
to comb his hair, but he arose to leave the tent. \ 

“Oh, but [I meant to comb your hair, you know!” his sister-in-law 
said to him. ‘ 

“No, for you are alone in the tent,” he told her. 

At that the woman rose to her feet and stood in the doorway, blocking 
the passage for her brother-in-law. 

She said to him, ‘Brother-in-law, fond as I have been of you from the 
beginning, what I want.to tell youis, ......2.. re 

With that the young man went out of the tent. - 

Then the woman thought, “If, likely enough, he tells hig brother about 
this, my husband will -be very angry,” she thought; “I had better tell my 
husband,” she thought; “Before he tells his brother, I had better tell him 
myself,” she thought. os 2 ‘ ; . 

When her husband came into the tent, she told him thus: “My hus- 
band, it was not in this way that I mean}, it, when from the first I showed 

~s. affection to your young brother. .°. . 040. a 
hee eye ww a a a. . . . She told him; “I was greatly surprised 
when he spoke in this way to me; that is why\I am telling you of it. And 
so now I shall no longer be able to feel any fondness for your young brother,” 
she told him. . 5 an oo , 
At once that man was distressed. . a ; 
“St was not in this way that I meant it, when I would’ say to you, 
“Try to be fond of my young brother’,” he told her. é 
__ Now the young man was embarrassed by what his sister-in-law had 
' said’to him. He did not feel like going there any more. ° 
“It really seems that my young brother did intend something like 
that, secing that he docs not come to my tent any more,’’\thought that 
eldest, brother, . ; Nos a, 
.. He was very angry at what his wife had told him, Then at one time, 
when the young man, after a long interval, did go there, as he was about 
to step into the tent, his eldest brother saw him. He seized a knife, think- 
ing, “I shall kill my young brother.” As the latter was coming in, and he 
made to.stab: him, the young man threw himself \back. He managed to 
run the knife into him a little ways. He stabbed Him in the,abdomen, not. . 
deeply. The youth fled out of the tent; bis sister-in-law who had slandered . 
him kept crying out the while. Other women came out of their tipis and 
ran at the man who was pursuing his young brother. The man was seized 
‘ and held. So he gave up his intent. He was taken|home. When he went 
into his tipi, other men came in to admonish him, | ; a _ 


i 


, 


269 


“Why has he done thus to his young - prothér, when he is known to 
be fond of him?” 

He told hisstory; .. 1. ee tee 

. is why I have done this to him,” he told them. 

Then the young man was brought into his father’s dwelling and given 
medical treatment. It turned out that he stayed a long time, suffering 
pain, and nursed by the younger of his elder brothers, and by his sisters- 
in-law.. This brother had two wives. .They were very much distressed at 
what had been done to the youth, their brother-in-law, for they loved him 
like an own child, “Likely enough he will die,” was the general thought 
concerning that young man. In spite of the curative treatment given him, 
for a long tinie, in the outcome, he was ill. At last the man took his 
young brother to his own tent, to nurse him, thinking, “It is too much of a 
strain for my father and ‘mother to nurse my young brother; over here 


‘we can nurse him undisturbed.” Accordingly, they nursed his young 


brother. The man who had stabbed his brother never came to sce him, 
nor did his wife. Now that it was too late, the woman who had slandered 
her brother-in-law was sorry and wanted to see him. But whenever she 
said to her husband, “Let me go there,” he would beat her, for he was 
jealous, and even for that had done thus to his brother. 

At last the young man was on the way to recovery. 

“Surely, when I get well, my brother will go even so far as to kill me.° 
If I get well, I shall go away from here. What matter if somewhere or. 
other I go to my destruction?” thought the youth as he grew hetter. 

But when he became well, those sisters-in-law of his and his brother, 
never slept, but took turns in attending to him and not sleeping of nights. 
Once, when the younger of his sisters-in-law was 8 watching, toward dawn, 
he perceived that she was sleepy. 

He said to her, “Sister-in-law!”’ 

“What is it?” ‘ 

“Please give me a small piece of leather and o sinew and, &h awl,” 

“What do you want to do?” she asked him. 

“Tt is my moceasin which is torn that I want, to: mend, " he told her. 

“Take it off and give it to me; Jet me sew it. You ate never to do 
your own sewing; even when you aré well; do you suppose you will be 
allowed to do your work now that you are barely alive?” she asked him; 
“In any case, this is a little thing,” she told him. - 

But the young woman was very sleepy. At last she gave her brother- 
in-law. what he asked of her. Then the young man cut from it, cut the 
leather to shape. As soon as he saw that his sister-in-law was asleep, he 
took alli of those things; he took his quiver. 

Thus he went out of the tent and away, thinking, “I may as well go 
to my destruction, it matters not where. In any case my brother will 
always despise me.’ 

So he set out, with no destination. 

When that man woke up, he did not see hia young brother. 

‘ He roused his wives, asking them, “Where is my brother?” 
“The last I know was that he said he was going to mend his moccasins; 


"and though I kept asking him to give them to me, he would not do it, until - 


at last I gave him the things he wanted to: use. Then, when I lay down, I 
must have fallen asleep and not noticed his going out,” the one told him. 
te ers 


270 


The man knew that his young brother had gone away. He went and 
told his father, that his brother might be Jooked for, for his father was 
chief, and had power over the camp. So the old man went out of his tent 
and announced that they had Jost his son, and ordered a genera) search 
for him. 


By this time the youth was far off. Where there was heavy timber, 
he went into the woods. Well into the weods he sat down. At last he 
lay down, thinking, ‘““May I not be founds 

Those people searched everywherer He was sought here and there in 
the woods, but not found. At Jast night came. . 


‘When it was entirely dark, the youth set out. He did not know in 
what direction he was going. When daylight was again near, again he lay 
down, in a wooded ravine. ; 


Now, those people searched also in the woods; but by this time the 
youth was far away. The searchers all turned back before they had come 
upon him. , - 

The young man slept all day. In the evening he awoke. Presenily 
he heard someone weeping. When he made to sce the one who was weeping, 
he recognized his brother, standing motionless on a hill. So he kept hiding 
from him,, His brother was weeping for him, because he had lost him. At 
last, as darkness was coming on, his brother departed to go home; when 
he heard him no more, he, too, set out, in the dark. All of that night 
again he walked. Toward daybreak he lay down, wherever-he happened to 
be, thinking, ““Now<1-am surély far off; now surely. no one will see me.” 
When he awoke, it was already bright day. “I may as well walk by day- 
Jight now,’* Re’ thought. So, he started off. He had not eaten frofn the , 
time he set out. He walked all day, and when darkness was falling, again’ 
lay down where he happened to be. By this time he was hungty. The 
next morning he went on. He did not know, however, where hé was going. 
He had never gone about secing the world. He was very hungfy now. .Now 
_ he never walked at night; but only in daytime. In time he must have gone 
very far, walking every day, as he did. ; 

Presently he felt himself growing feeble; indeed, he was almost 
prostrate with hunger. Yor he never ate, purposely refraining from killing 
anything he might eat. _ 
| “Oh, it really looks as if I should simply starve to death. It would 
be better. if some creature should kill me, But if nothing kilis me, and if I, 
by any chance; kill something, and if, besides, I find.something that I can 
use, then I shall go home, if from any place I get something,” he thought; 
“If 1 see anything I can eat, I suppose I had better try.to kill it,” he thought. 

_ But he did not see anything. Then in time he could no longer walk 
with any speed, so weak was he from hunger; he hobbled along leaning on 
a stick, feeble from starvation. UT a 
, Presently, after two nights, at last he saw a partridge; and thought, 

I shall try to kill it, that I may eat.” So he shot an arrow at it; he killed 


it. He took it and plucked off the feathers. Near by was aive in.the land; — 


he saw that there was 2 wood beyond. oe 
“T'shall try to camp there for the night,” he thought and set/out. 


When he got to the top of the hill, he saw a little lodge standing there. 
Truly, I am glad that I shall see some people,” he thought. 


) 


w 


¢ 


271 


He did not consider that they might destroy him; “Now I am surely 
destined to live; otherwise I should have died of hunger,” he thought. 

He went there. When he reached the place, -he saw nothing outside 
the lodge, but someone spoke for him to hear, “Come in, grandchild! 
Come right in!” said an old woman, for him to hear. 

When he entered, why, there she was, all alone. 

“My grandchild, my grandchild,” she said to-him; “Heavens, it is a 
dangerous place whither he is bound!? she told him; “Sit, down over there,” 
she told him. - 

Then he gave her that partridge. ; - 

- “Grandmother, take this to eat,” he told her. ; 

“Truly, my grandchild is giving me a treat!’ she said to him; “And 
so my grandchild has been going hungry! I shall cook something for him,” 
she said to him. 

After hanging up a tiny little kettle, she put into the water two tiny 
bits of meat and two little berries; “Here am I, starving, and my grand- 
mother puts so Jittle food into her ‘kettle!” he thought. 

At once she said to him, “Grandchild, it is an evil place to which. 
you are going.. Never does anyone ‘return, when people BO there,’ In, 
vain do I always try to dissuade the young men,’ she said; “Grandson, 
you had better go back home in the morning. It is an evil place to which 
you are going,” she told hin. « - 

“Oh, grandmother, T am too far along by now. As it is, I shall'die of 
hunger, to no purpose; if] reach that place and something or other destroys 
me, it will be as well. vi flto no purposaed-starve to death on, the way, then 
too I shall not reach home,” he told her. 

“Very well, my grandchild, stay here four nights, and I shall” ‘at any 
rate te ech s you something as to the way you shall do,” she told him. . 

° “Ves! ft 


Then she gave him food; he ate. He was not ablgit eat up those | / 


‘ things which she gave him” to eat. When he could no. eat them all, he. 
handed them to*his grandmother. ‘a ; 
“Goodness me! Truly my grandson is a poor ate? retne ‘said to him. 
Then she instructed him about the place to whieh he was going, telling 
. him ehout it, ahd finally teaching him songs. 
Preseritly ghe said-to him, “Grandson, you ‘inust be tired! You had 
better sleep now,” she told him. — 
‘nd go he went to hed. 
When he awoke, “Grandson, get up now! Fat! T have finished cook- 
-ing,” she said. 
Then he arose. Then she brought her tiny kettle and set it before 
him, and he ate. . _ , : 
After a while he had enough; ‘and, Truly, little at a time does, my. 
grandchild eat!” she told him 
. “When I have as much as this, I am always filled,” he told her." - 
- ’ ‘Then he stayed there all day, for several days. In the evening, when 
they, had eaten, she ywould teach him songs, and when she thought he had 
enough of it, she would say to him, “Go to bed!” ~ 
- When the fourth night had come, “Now then, my y grandson, the time 
has.come for you to £0," she told hiro. 
3186-184 


ae 


. 27200 oe 
By this time he felt in good health again, when for four nights his 


grandmother had fed him; he was quite stout by this time; he no longer 
"was feeble from starvation. ‘ 


His grandmother told’ him as follows: ‘My grandson, even though I 
-have taught young men in this same way, they did not follow my instruc- 
tions, and, therefore, went, one after another, to their ruin. If you heed 
my words, you will fare well; but if he dissuades you to whom you will 
come, he will destroy you,” she told him; ‘At any rate, carry this on your 
person,” she told him, giving him the skin of a beaver-owl; “This thing, 
my grandson, you will keep for four nights. If he does not destroy you, 
when you are sleepy, ‘Grandfather, let me lie down'a while!’ you will say 
to.him. If he says ‘Yes,’ you will place this thing on your chest. ‘Now 
then, if my grandfather speaks to you, answer him! I shall sleep. When 
daylight is near, then wake me!’ you will say to this thing. And this,” 
she told him, ‘You will spread under you as you lie,’ his grandmother 
told him, as she gave him her breech-clout; ‘Only by doing thus will you ~~ 
be able to overcome that old man.*, And when you are near there, as youo 
along you will pick up a stick, a ‘stick that is not large. When you halve 
slept twiée on the way, you will see water. Not at all will you be able to 
see where that body of water has its end,’’ she told him; ‘‘And so, after 
the day is. past noon, then you wil-have come near that lake. It will be 
level land. You will see-a very small rise in the land. To it you will go; 
there you will seat yourself. When you have seated yourself, there close to 
the lake you will%ee a tall man come into view. He will be dressed like 
a woman. You will not see his feet. When he comes to where you are, * 


will come forth into view. . “There, this oneyI give to you. Go home!’ . 4 
he will say.to you. Do you not heed his wotds:. Say this to him: ‘Tt is. (0 +”, 


lift up his long skirt. You will see his feet. You will see that his feet are’ : 
like a horse’s. ‘Heavens! What do my grandfather’s feet look like!’ you... 
will say to him. ‘What. do they look ‘like, grandson? Do you mean to - 
n . ‘Be x S Varo , mn, ; . . 
wake 7 te . 7 


ov 


273 ; ‘ 
say that you see them?’ he will ask you. ‘Yes! Your feet look like horses’ ' 
hoofs,’ you will answer him. My grandchild, be sure, by all means, to try © 
to see his feet. If you see them, then indeed you will overcome him. But 
if you do not see them, if you do not do as I now am teaching you, he will 
overcome you,” she told him; “But if you see his feet, then indeed you will 
overcome him. Then, if you succeed in staying there four nights, then 
every day he will give you one, horse. ‘Go home!’ he will tell you. You 
will not obey him. It is really only if you defeat him that he will give you 
those horses, When the fourth night of your stay has passed, ‘Now, grand- 
father, it is your own horse, the stallion, that I have come to fetch,’ you will 
’ say to him.’ ‘Very well,’ he will answer you. By the door there will be 


' lying an ugly saddle; and the rawhide bridle, strung together of small 


ends, will be ugly. For these you will ask him. ‘It is those other saddles 
that are good, and those bridles,’ he will say to you. Do not heéd his 
words. He will defeat you with this one thing, even though you go un- 
harmed through the four nights,” she told him; “If you persuade him this 
time too, ‘Very well then, grandson; now for my own horse which you have 
_ come to fetch!’ he will say to'you. Then he will go out of the lodge. He 
will take that very same ugly saddle‘and bridle. Then you will follow 
him. He will stand beside‘the lake. ‘My horse, come to land!’ he will 
feall. At once the water will rise up high; it will look as if it were boiling. 
At last’a.stallion with a bay coat will come out of the water. It will come 
to the land. It will drag its.tail on the ground. And its mane, here, too, 
will almost reach the ground. When it comes to land, ‘There, grandson; 
take him!’ he will say to you. Do not obey him. ‘Take him for me!’ you 
will say to him. - When he has taken it, ‘Saddle him for me!’ you will say to 
him. When he has saddled it, then, ‘Here you are, grandson!’ he will say 
to you. Do not heed his speech. ‘Put me on his back!’ do you then say 
to him. If you do this, you will live;- you will defeat him. But if you 
take the horse before he has set you on its back, that horse will destroy 
_ you; it will eat you,” she told him; “But if he puts you on its back, then 
indeed you will come home. Having stayed there four nights, you will 
‘win forty horses from that old man: But though again and agajn I have 
taken pity on young men and instructed them even in this wise, yet they | 
. have, not obeyed me. That is why any number of young men have not - 
--returned from there, but have been destroyed by him,” she told him; ‘Very 
sad is your father, and your mother,’and your elder brother, and those 
your sisters-in-law who are fond of you,” she told him. — 


Then he set out, after she had given him the things she wished to give 
him. When he set out, “Twice you will sleep on the way,’ she had told - 
him; and so, when twice he had slept, then he saw a lake. Not at all could 
he see to where the water had its end. At last he came there, close to that 
lake. At last, when‘the day was past noon, he saw 2 small'knoll. There 
he sat down..’ Look as he might, he saw nothing. At last a person came 
into sight from the jake, and walked. toward him. ' ‘Just like a woman,’ 
he thought of him, for. his skirt was long. —~ 

nine “Go. honie, ” this person said to him, “My. grandson! Y? he said. 
to him. . 
“Oh, no!. The fact is I have come to visit you!” he answered him. 
7 & a, grandson, the one youshave come to fetch you shall take home 
with your? ’ the other told him,.walking toward him; and- at the same time 
a white horse came forth into view? . a 


t os . . , . ‘ ee 


att 


“Th id not chinonue Chive come to feteh, Ui iq your own horse [have 
cola to feted? 

“Henn nes bub dik ig ay awa horse that | pelze vory highly, whieh | 
na giving yout! 

“Not (hid ane!!! le aoawered hin, 

“Oh, indeed? Wall, than goto the plaek here fram whish Phaye come! 
(ia on!" the-other told thin, 

UNO, grandfather? Do you will nhend!’? he told him, 

The olberteled to talk him down, At tnst, at he argned baek, the 
olber gave ia to hha and set aut, Baylog to him, Well, grandson, walls 
right whead hovel? ff 1 walle hafore hha, he will hee my foet,’? the other 
Hhenght concerning bins that wan why he said thid to him, 

Mo, when they went on and enne to the other aide of the knoll, there 
win i tarps bipi, 

Whoo thay renched it, “Phere, grandson, go int Over on thin side 


Jyou will neo on bendod muddle, and an excallent rowhide thong bridle, tht 


you diay bike to une on thisany horse which | hall give you, when you go 
rome," 


"Oh, uot | de nol mous to go homef Tt is another horse of yours 
whieh bhave eome to fetcht! he told hin, ; 

Thon the other urged iin hy speech; “Do you go dn fest! he told 
him, fle, in taro, doged the other, tn the ond, again he persuaded the 
other An he was entaring, he lifted bis skirt with the allele: he saw that 
he hind horned’ feat, os 
r Ag he entered, “What iid of feet has iny grandfather?” he sald to 
Wa, ' 
"Crindvon, do you mente to any that you see my feet?” the othor 
anhed him, . 

OV gy tt 

“What do they look like?! 

Vou have feet just lle a hart! 

"You don't seyl Bo you veally have seen omy feat! the other said 
to hin, “ 

Thon uiglit eane on, 


Thon, an he stayed theres, when it had grown falrly dark, “Grandson, 
Tob un nob sleep, bate tell atorios,” the obher siadd to hime 

“Very wall Tirat det ine go ouldide a moment,” he sald to his grand- 
fabher, . \ 

Acwordingly, le went outside, Thon he fastened on bis grandmother's 
hreseli-clout down holow hore, aud that ala of a benver-owk he slipped 
hobwoen hin garmenia on hls chest. Lhon he entered the lodge, So then 
ies ake Lhasve, , 

Then, “Now (allay tale!” the other said to hb, . 
- Phen he told ntorien Thy told of hid journey to that places he did 
OL Fell about the old won, fe told the story up to the point where 
he saw the other, At lad be finished hin tila | 

At tat, “My tir bow!” said the ald nian, sand began to narrate, 

\ AQ night long ho told talon, the youth saying, “You! from time to 
nag, 

Alt tant he grow sleepy, 


27h 


“Crandfather, lel mo He hyn! Lotoame listen to you that wayl! he 
ankod hin, 

“Vory welll’ for if he slept, the old man would Ill him, 

Ho now he lay down, ; 

“Now thon,” he said to dhad thing whieh he had befwoen hid gaemonte 
heyes thin he anid to it: “Lam dleepy! fF want to nleap! NXpank to éhin ald 
man whenever he spoukes to you! When dawn ik at hind, bhen wala mol! 
he told it. 

WV ant" 

Bo now he went to steep. And as the old man wont on with his storion, 
whonever ha.waid to him, “Crandsont!” ¢hat bowver-owl skin would mnawor, 
“You, Lt heart? and to hin, “Yor are following my story, are you?” the 
othor would answer, “You!!! ° 

But ad for the’ youth, he had a good aoop. When it perneived that 
dawn war near, it walked the youth, Ike this, peeling’ at hin with its 
heak, So he nwoke; he rose to hia foot, 

Then daylight came, All this dime be and hla grandfather had been 
sitting up, 

When it was wlmoué neon, he gave him anothor saddle, 

“Now, grandson, yy horse that you have come to Coleh in dancing 
outaide here, & blnak horse,” he told hin, . 

“Oh, it th not thiq one P have come to foteh!’ he told hin, 

“tndeed?” 

Then, when the other had put back the waddle, agaln he told hin 
xtovies; intonding that he should not dleap, At lit diadaiost oamie iyi, 
while the other told (ales without eoase, 

Agnin, when ho felt sleepy, “Lot me tie dawn,” ho asked hin, 

Agnin he Iny down, and again placed (hat thing here, 

“Always speak to him’ f want to sleep! Whoa dawa in nen, you will 
wike mol” he told it, 

So thon, when ho slept, whenover Lhe obher said to hing, “My grandson! 
Cuwu thing which waa watohing Ghrough tho night would nay to hin, “Yor, 
ron |? ° 

Whon daylight was near, agnin it woke hin, "hon hoe arora, 

Whon it was full day, the other again gave him annaddle, 

“Now, grandson, here ib ial Go home! Now | shall give you a roan 
home, Co bomat: Your kdnafelk are suffering: mach with longing for you,!! 
he told hin, . . 

“Nol he anid to the oGher, : 

At that the other took bnaole the sniddle, ‘Phon ho agnin told him 
tories, intending Ghat be should not loop. Al day bo told him storion. 
Ad Jast darkness onme, and atill the olhoy was telling him taton, At Tart 
it was doop night, 

Whan again he fell sleepy, again he lay down, saying, “Alwaye aniwer 
him!” te that akin of the littl: ROund-Myoes “Tall always to himt 2 want 
to sleet At the time whon you always wale ime, thon you will witke mol? 
he naid’ to it, ; ' ; 
Then he ny down, That oll man did not know tint bo wre tolling 
hin tales to that skin of a beaver-owl, but thonght, tb in bhat-youth who 
ways Aponks ‘to mo; truly, ho isa long time gong to sleep,” he Ghought 
of that youth, thinking, Mor threes nighta bo has not-lept,”” at he kept 
on with his tales, 


veo 


A710 


Again, whon dawn war non, ib weld hin Ho hoe none, and truly,: 
thie old nu wart Colllug talon, ; 
Anchiy anime ou, aid at lak roadhod Ue hedglit, ager ha doale a ands, 
' Now, hore [bln geandion! Go homet Mile hore of rlne daa gored, 
Phieniuit by dhe one youlinve come le foto. Co home nowl Your fathor, 
your mother, your older hot re suffering mach with vain longdiag 
for you,” he told bin, . 
“Oh, no, grandfather! Ct le nob thiy 
bold han _ ; 
“AL Uhh the other book baok the daddio, Qheratipoa agitate bopgan 
bo (ott tin talon, thinkdog, “Whether he Uke thor oot, he shall seep! 
Bit ho could not paniihly grow aoapy, diac be alyyt all the bine; Tewar - 


only the old roan who got to deep. Howl day log he told storia. At 
Taste ptisdiy Ciorke rvs fell, OO . 
Whon he again grow sleepy, aged, (weak to Hetdowa,” he add TH 


tind Chadiages UA to hin! f want be Hloapl At the thine when you always 
wile me, thon do you wales ie," ha weld to dt, ai he tay dawn, mid the 
old ten bold dade atl alg ; 

When dawn wan non, th walked hihi again Ab dail it was day, 

Then ad dnt, “Now thea, you dhall go home now, my geraudaont Vory- 
piilable aco your father, your mother, your older brother” be told hiias 
You have overcome mie, my peandion,” he told thing “Come, now tet an 
KO oubiidel” , , . 

Whon the other now toole up that ugly anddle and rawhide bridle: 
thong, an they wont out of the tent, there he aiw those four borer, band: 
KOMe, oooh One, and, “Tove they are, my gemadsoal” the other told hit, 

"Yi dn your own hore E have come to foleh,” he told hie 

Thon, “Vory woll!? 

Then thoy wont to the tale, and from there, “My home, oun bo 
FST US bad wee 

Suddenly he sw Ghe water die tp high, just ne iP it were boiling, aed 
Ab fant he nw on hors come from that water, and come to abore, i bay 
hori, thwart na nladion, 

“Thove, thin id tho one, my geandaont ladles hdaal! 

“Oh, prondfadhor, Gade dbl! 

Roally, the old miu took dh 

“Thore, now, any geaeddon, aacddle diteal! 

“Nod Hieclllo bin for ane!” 

Really thes old tien saddled Ht, 

“Thorn, Kore you tive tin, my genie 

“Nob mie on hid bavelet?- 

The other net bite on ihn biel. Ub raed 

“Hla thore, fam pelvlan my hore tdiny grandiont Come ta tana; 
ho monn to take you home with hint! ald ho 

Really, ih oame back bo dry land, 


“Now thon, my grandion, you have como dro afar, Only ones will 
you nloop on the way. There whore you doop, horses now will overtake 
you. To prive very highly thin one TD bave given you, When you mrive off 
yonder in your poople't ham, then made tay in offeciag of stowed borrles, 
And places round the noel of Wid your borg n-gacimeiin langle of rod 


16D five come bo fetoh," he 


fi 


han it ho geo deal halo the wale 


Ae 


477 


alot, And ag nany ase those horses, around the necks of all you will 
Hhad a piece of red elo. These are my dnstructions to you, my grundson, 
You will ask for many strands of fnesnne grand, iat you may bin jteense 


fo dhe horses, You will hinve them goo nbout with the strands of ineenwe 


grag dn hele mouths, Your Idannen will help you put te geans Jato the 
Horne! moudli And tn that wise, from thins bine on they Will onl Aiay 
will ail, german, Mor indeed they da vot eat, whom you tre whgub be tae 

here with you,” he told Whig Pa eondequence of this you will han chief 
nmong your people, When you mre nk wi, HE you are moked on thin 
your shes, walleye will wound you,!? des biked felis nl a i Keen, in 
fuck, Ghat you hive decalved aie, die that on your way here you ene Wa 
thea tbode of ty wifel! be told hin; Well, Ui dn all, ny grandyanl 
Co homel” fo 

Accordingly, Ghat youth enie home,  Uiding all day; nob at all did 
he gen hin gemdinathers her dwelllag was no longer thera, \ Ag he had 
walked nolan ines far away wes ihe Wace from whieh he fad come, 
When it grow dark, wh the plies whieh he had renehed, being deapy, be 
ininountied, Uninkding, “F whnll eleep. ie eat there, holding that horse 
Of bin hiy thas betelle, tfidoadcbouge, Ye would ria away froin me, iP ainy prand- 
father perchance should be deceiving west? 

Presently he heard, “Cruulson, tet go ar borne! tae dowal Tere 
cone your hare! be heard bbin eal, oO 

According 3 fie let it eo and Iny down, “De wont right to deep, White 
he dlapl, presently Wheres caine the thudding of toe horses npproqelbig 
ai nord They cus there nid mon about in tw circle, he Litt Al, brush 
they remained AUD there, Ue wa yelonalesp, When de awoke, ib was 
diylvank, here were those horses resting whout the place, Ue rose to 
hin foot and took his own hore, Then, an be mounted nnd started Sorth, 
thon they all cone Go thele feet and fallawed thin, as he rode shedght on 

Vownds aventag ad tient be dow ahaa being, Ue rode in that diree- 
ton, The youth, for sigh he turned oul bo be, recoguized hhin, and rejoiced, 

*oubblers he has gone to desirieon! has heen the thought can- 
cornlug you, Your father aid your brother are very uubappy," the other 
hold hin - - 

OWell now, fo hemet Gebiny falda nad his household setup a tout 
aff to one ide, Ag Koon sD Keon bent Off Lo one Kida, J shall go tiers,” 
he told the other “iron anywhere ak all deb oiy fader dey to get berries 
nnd ineanse grag. Ef he has oot auch, deb him ask fall of the tipis, as 
nieny sus Lhey tet, For TGerines frAKR, Anal fet alin fepsires HF pany of Weis penile 
hives plone of red cloth, dha he nay ak lo bave then," he said, an a 
nese LO bids fichier; bast go bell this tooay father,” hie told the other, 

Accordingly, thi young Joan nin hore and weal fo that old rn, 

“On ian You will rejoins ol what dt shadl tll you, Liste enre- 
fully to 16,” be bold bling “Your kon whom Jong ago you lost d have seen 
fat sow, Chis fe bid meninges do your (OR alone det him get up a. tent, 
When fie hes completed he lant, perhaps there are some berries; there let 
them preps,’ he bold bbs And let hii bg avery where for pieees 
of red sloth, Giotah he any wale bo dinave it. And if he have bit Hille ineouse 
gerne, bids Loo let him go about demanding, Sadie dry de get much of it, 
is hid menage (oO you, ‘When | see the tent, J eball go there,’ says your 
Kou,” he wae bold, Well, that jes all” - 


s 


27H 


Oh, the old ian wae glad, 

Wits, go tallour son Ghat ble younger brothor bad arrived?! Let him 
jnvite the offer young men to qome ded up tis dont of ours off to one aldo of 
the camp. Wo haven little red eloth,  fashball go about adking for none, 
and for ineeune grass, When you have told our son, then pat the borrlen 
info water,” he told her, 

WIA that tie off man seb oul to go about anking for the thhagey, 

Then she wet off and told hor sou “My son, your younger brother 
hand werlved wad Das been seen. Let theme net up a bent off ta ane ride,! 
iL second he had sald: go you are to bivite the other youngeauen” 

The young mia ward glad, and ao were those women glad that (hele 
hrathor-in-liw was alive, Ho thay went and putup the tiplolf to one side, 
Hy the dive thoy hid findnhed deddhog ap tho teat aad arranging the Interior, 
the old toa eaume wih bbe things he had beaérequdaltioning., What thoy 
had the tentoall in good shape, thon that youth eame from yonder place, 
Hoe deft hla borden bobind. Then, when he came tite the band, and: the 
incenna wart being burned for him, thorns people rejoiced that tha young. 
man had weriveds And thore wore all the Unga he wanted: no now he 
dated the old men to ant the abe wed borden nid to piroke, and he lustraeted 
Juin fabhor to paine aloft thone stewed berries to hin rnd father, and ie hold 
Lhe alent of bls pipe in that direstion, but that all those who ait there were 
Lo oad hone alowed beveled. fe did not samen that’ older brother of hin 
who had stubbed hin and he did not eame, for he stood in awe of him 
nod foared bin. hon, when they had done eathye the borrles, then he 
wont out of the font, and felelied bin hordes, ‘Then, whoo he cane bringle 
then, wud all the horses followed it hth heels, Ghone people grontly rajoianel 
for never had thay, deen anything Uke those horton, ‘They wogidered 
grently ab thelr appenrnnes; for (hit was thele fit sight of them, 

When he hind brought thom there, he lt Ghose abraded of inesnsd pens, 
junto i he wore maddiag a aloud of smote, aq an locedse offering to the 
horeed; and to an ionny youth an were thore, “Help me; pub thea teense 
strands jobo the horkes? prouthe,) he sald, . 

Accordingly, they helped hin. By the time ib win growing dark, thoy 
had done workdnp, at (hen, Then, the next morning, they tied plibess of 
red cloLh round the neeks of dl the horses, aad he ted ne garmont’s ough 
round (ha nieek of bin awa ntead, When then ho let them go loon, they 
never woul fir off in hele prngings for now tie horses ale geass, When 
the fourth nlaht had pasted, he sammened the people, ono man from each 
and every tenk Only that brother of his who chad stabbed Tdi he did 
nob dnvilo, When wll had come thore, ho gave enoh ono a horse, atid he 
had gone the round, ‘Vo the younger of hin two older brothers he gave 
Lwa, And to hin father, aldo, bwo, He ckopt oul one poor ono, thinking, 
“Phin EF aiall give to that brother of mine,” and for hinself he kept only 
Whit shallion, So much for bits, , 

Then the people weil aad setup that dont for him hi the centre of the 
any nid his father gave flim the chislianey, that he inight rule over 
the people, In the morning thea he summoned his elder brother, the 
ong who bad stabbed him, together with his wite, 

An they entered, “Oh, come til! he sald do thems “Oh, Fam morely 
putting you Lo needles trouble! be auld to hls elder brother. 

When hit slaterdn-law would greet hin, be paid no attention to her, 


ov AL) 


Hoenn to hin brother, “The fret in that Ewin to nsk you somethdige” 
he tole hia, z : ' 

Vary woll, ale ino, brothor,” the abhor answered linn, 

Why, whon ft thought of you, (Ho loves ine, did you do thik Lo ine, 
whon you hourly kdled moe? What wan the romont’! he nated didi 

That woman mew nolhfag te do bab poo out of the font. 

“Flo, do nell” ald that man Co hin wifes “Do not go outt lheak let 
my brother finiih what he dan tomy,” lio told hoe, 

Whon (he olfive had fatshod aiden bhi, “Now, brother, Crendty id 
love yous and youd sidoreiu-law hore alia loved you. f weus inl that your 
Kintor-inelaw took fiauoh good ears of you. You were badly cilatakens 
whon | wan alone fn dhe tent your yoting, brothor enim in. co. 


2 the fold ing. ‘Thea 0 wat angry, and “Craly, 


hin charaotor is bad! DP thought of you, soelae how much we hid loved 
you! he told tin, : 

‘Donne, no, brothert FE laiow hhhw mutch you loved ine, Th ba true 
that when Fonmne and ontored your typi your wifo war nitding alone. When 
P wanted to pro out nga, bent oat,! whe told tae, (No, you te alos in 
tho-tent, Enid te hor, ‘Oh, ih doos uot roakter that Faun alone, seoiag 
how fond we are of you’ Bo Lint down and she gaye ine food, Whoa ft 
had caten, ind war rite booing foot, (ini litoine comb your haley! ale 
Had tome. (No, you ue mone in the oat,’ bad to hore, When trfecl bo 
fo on oul, Khe bleaked tao da bie dooe way. oe 
J Whe sdd tomes Of you dons Dank, much at have loved you, Fahad 
lake oven better care of you! (Why, how eould Cla stich ne thing? My 
brother dine good tome! Dadd to bee, Ole doen nat need to kaow of Hy! 
the answered me. Thon, whoo ule gtepped aside, boemtne cube Twas 
embarraned, for EF looled pon albiny alatore-in law ever an upoo my 
mother, whon thoy wore ho good to tne,” he bold hing (Th wan for thin 
renion tliat for along bine FE did bot cone dato your tant, beentne she who 
niin hore had putine fo shame. Woll, titi in wht f warted to know, for, 
Why hin he done thly to ime?! wan any Ghoupelit a you, Now 
thon, bike home with you the andi that ia tolhored hereg dive hin bo 
you,” he told hii, 

“Tanta, Ghankel! wld the older brother 

But he was aagey, +t 

“Come, let unt po home!” ho wd to hin wife, 

Whon thoy had gone ont, as they enine bo thoir font youdor, aftr 

abylng up the home, bo wld to hin wife, “het un go over thi hill there,” 

Whon they bad ait dowp there, “And no th append thik you tao of ft 
monk ovil naburel! Th apponnd Chal you were tho one who fuel that dosieo! 
Komombar, (loved avy little brothor! And hore borin non killing whit 
win denn to mel bo wd to hor, and baking a lenifo, stabbed her tpeatedly, 
wid dilled bor, ° 

Thon he wont home, 

Thon that youth war gived hin eitor-indaw, the young wort: whom 
hb had anked form pleco of tonthors bie older brother, her barband, gave 
hor to hin, So he had thin sintersinelaw of his to wile, _ 

Sa thin way, thon, hort came bo be, for the fest bine sines bho begin 
ning of the world, ° 
Thin, now, Inthe ond of the anvered ntory, of ibe sntory. 


+ 


peu 


2 


Wp  « 


(19) Wath “ 


Mra. Mafyia Achonums * 
ha nahhack nuh. . 
— hatuhtund dank wap bah biinntin pokaudyah. — dhanah hiatal 
thith ba hime, . 
“banihl ba talauengahh 7 Hint ve 
© ha manghibaninina." * ; ; 
phinah Ws ahah, akwuh mtgag ah -japahlal, wlan lady. 
Abuah whi oypsiginiuiah, @ fanisih hi totuniyahh fe 
 mannhipanihh akpoh whowinakanskihh he qabtapudaluanan 0" 
“ahuah doh p pakudtimanan tanita bk datudpinagahh, Maina 
Auufahbih nth & anuapinonin, © 
Abanh palin wapueuah ¢ Mhawih kupadtaimeonak, 
"fanitah kay ini pindtahk, monahdpanthh abpok ubanlnakaasbahh 
Ahadih ayn,  ydhaatin hnminukumubiths " . 
abulih i Aatudpinenin,” indian, 
abibtinadnk nnpusiagh 7 ubsmluukwedsbihh dabodpindiak, — ahaa 
miyuedhi hbo, . 
 nimatinudanindoith {7 
OM pol gd gi ili, 
a" PT Mididenl dy 1)" Hern wpa. 
Ahughuhh pa yah. alagolbisly Abe banihtayon. 


Gare apa bi HA ined be da nile, He angerid the people 
fete Whee bas phaale en, 

MWh hill we de le hin?! Whey waded. 

Yah tis pod a mune for bina dts 


Vey eh wae wie far hit.) Vien when Mbit ron Where, he wal 
oT ee A : 


Nhe Mines pele, “Whiad ehidl ye da with hind? 
Sha we, Mae Ain ide wed or inka bie bangle?” 


Yad us heh din ahr we wre ba Meow Win, Whichever he foun, 
hie wh chit Maroy hin! i 


ha Mey telelial Wadd and questioned bin, 

"Hhave shill we Mwy yon, dito well ov inte thie brambbes?? 
Nhe Middl, 8 aaa atin af Hs beatles! 

bere ye whl Avo Ning,” Mey nied, 


Phe Mak WA a Widths Shey dhrew Win inte the bnanbles, Ue 
hess lid at Uhide , 


biker my wey paayeronnd yt 
Sha; cise selene, 

Ley kind ab yon hae Miri ie bevel” jad Mal ditt, 
Aad tb hae finiehed ane mycred ary, 


- on 


(30) Partridge and Quail 


- Adan Hakeuen 
wth dtuilian, 


hatahtawdh, d-minth olan apginigintwuk abeunkitaik, pdyuk ukimaiw 
mMdnind miynntyfd, — pilniinal: hahkiyun park wiki makinahp fndmaldw, 

ah nakatihh pagal hindyinin, dkwah unakimakanah, wotukdaloah,  dkioahk 
wun iniedatah ayauaiwak.  watukohpihk uakheak oki ha nakatihtaik. 

ah wapanigik, yuepamubtawak okt lahwantih, ah ainahhike wkanah, dh 
sihahuallk, A ndwabhinahhihe matubah pith, ah-ortsimapohhdtaak, dhs 
piheah ay fil nedainetaile, 

Ahwith hatahtawah napintiak, dy iigatinagik, natakam abled matirtain 
napa pdyak » dkunh payak dy ate pabkiaiguhk fad hutak ming dyaku 
weal favlivthih guveincth | ah jaltunuabkih fapatinihh dy ituhtatih, — dhe 
amaluhin tulkahbunh hatok mind, ka pimakiuligih: vikahkwoan, — vwapuhtam 
doa niihim hah atnimk. nin half Iniahk ml Audak mand hae pla 
akuldyihs duantetan boatatnak ud pdata anabaidio, watkahhwan d-natahh, 

dyahoh fitth dtih aon ayeayak fC uath-nitawed wi, | kiihaw{h fp . 
am Wt Abad ion gel infiavnhh h-nhtubtat, 

"haa ld nanny Lhiy ath ane da wih-wunigan 0" itd ana natakam 
h ahtuhtat, 

Ahamah,  hiutaind ani 2 tain, 

hah yabtatsjoawah, nadukahpihh ab itubtatiih, — pdyek nanny 
wiypluklafa, . nitaban bh ooktihlal veapiihiniw ; kigamdintane 5” nance 
mennnth inkiakiodo ayahi. akon won hidak hanks, dh-ananitind, ah- 
pbb abit, ‘ 

"hen, dhulah anih timatwatdan 0" eda anu h anamnihenat. ~~ 

mee dtd: dfeutahe, : 

habbit oh madafik ighiwdnliak ka-paltawalark napangsh ah late 
wdguitamdiyll . 

"hay, noldah, kablelna A-ha pinthbsth: otiah sivaujnak vig ha tatnit- 
mati, habtainah a hih-mdpinthtak duakunik wana, kiyanne ona ban 
wid nial yap 1" 
Haha, nheuenininitth, akatale anih abamishatam naheashanh, anal 
mbeminiihuk pith piyeh. akon namuga be pakiabataimai,  watit- 
midtawdmayakuninl, yhawr-ntumibhiak, ! awa: ok wakswoaniiah, 

mtn dh aakevlwiyik, Habla: ok wikiugadaah, bee pubdabevwdibe tia hi 
Ahakdmalh aun ao onsale, a ogni niin ng nied pak fakin, 
nk, med n witplrifncch i obadni nits ka ncn onan, 

Ahnu’ dan ulintatith, “ombinahh  kra-pedy iahtandmain ta seiley-ma~ 
matantnrdtihh 6" : , 

“oman noha kaewah-wunigan 1 ihoa din hitw-unamitaanialt | 
yah, kiplewnand tata nahahhapl EM iain mama, 


A hug wor fnthathuin) ones!) Chard ah, or peabaplisnted faaturhabhinanah) be 
iwcll wba of ofall deorkss wits whieh yn Hee eI, Anne Whee fotos dane aca dated J enue 
nip i dae groiind, nid Ae oppenenh Wied Lalivaw in at ies tae split Whe ther. Mfus 
watery wor Hie ailinlds wenden f hind Sah) dase ot Ud clin? ied wotneng moenbling boy 
Wiehe ennai (waa on Mba ishunbe Jresarve) of four slit of wool alagued Lhe i bnites 
Wiltsades with /ntn tian bleditly eoneyear, navel enesseniriiggs perhaps ly i inaliead, | On canie sila 
ab Lweidlas ie bene ideas on one aide ot the uh two, wenned drveha, The four slide 
Are penned In nue Anne aad Gases Glee bhiraw souls acenrding ba tlie combinnhon of 


Dearth, were brian, nas Lisa Ml hana ape 


as 


HAY 


t . . 
Cy One her wah Wry yah Heme Hye, ite Henk Ke Al anitnit, 
ON dha FE kitihueae awa 1) eqn (HEN I auanitnati : 
Rta Td Adit aahtaak Oh Tudiedadali, dkutak ey OU. Hah Apa 
dhitah, path pity CH verb itvatteadhs oh pubndalaah, . 

Aitahtind ana, én thir ah fitnnetmatulark, © han, pihdiuhan $0 
en natin Bas atau, dita Heated paket, Avtsweaguekh, anna 
ham pahluhahan ahaduk ta Ath puytials MEW API, Ma Noth - 
td imenatedmakaa, mT PHY wiku CN sintuitach, jhe, 

thal," ith, 

Hucndaetowah, avd Hhiwukan kaiyawan, ihieitih waked awd 
hat handed, , ; 

“nelralyanda f akwah Wwinth hi nalaipahat le” jtim, 

Chil at haniudnvutedte Her Mahan, dha Wd yet Fila pnprtpinal 
hohtiwiy hiking, heehmay puthtubkvawl 3 MANE netted nahin, wrhlannewdh- 
Aeniih mel paki, Ajupin aha Pnpantwans, poni-wihtakwahfe inn kuhhe 
fee epferen tials hohtnwipn hikawiy 3 bituhtini piitubahanihk, "ite 
HUT han, 


aKunl keihatn eth Manin, af pwdhtiu am Minnie Kaki yada, 
Th woh haya, MH, ath MAb hel —eehih AERA el yp 
TT enh hank, a nth HOHE, 
ahi aun adie se hyd 1 
Oh itwedt, he Peak at ncutianah mitutbleamils, 
ahi’ hay hein hi Lahn atid; 
(bun ht mH pay. baw hth ma HeAb Cen hey 
Aituhtudt a hth wed papayihy nawnaly hihate ah apihta hatheayili, sa 
Malek nd aeie, 
Watery aytaining mah wiht," matiminibhuk iments, dhe dit 
yayatuch EM itaddin aie fear matin tapudl, inyath a Mun Oh -anklah|s, 
HRY UNK puthtaweuuls ae iveah mcoahhitmil, — kuanitih aliminah 
h muayonnt Mah matukahpihte aka fend hawaeihl, epihtukdpayiyil mur: 

HIN, 

My walla, | hey Ghtai panpapit ahead hak Hii htnchahhham 1 
HEL HO Fike etain, 

LEI ATTA Nedn K-awamitunit, nat maluihatlal te-puapa- 
nent Lad mihdnttitalh mena twapnnauah (Medi ain 
HA pdarn, : 

dhwuh awe lukwdin, awdhtad wah Mp Yt ena painn, Wee pe 
Apitat one ha Hated dtamigity milaiml nds WHA dia natukdaiin, — alee 
WE tabavdtateals sna pant wieh aymeiiniat mtn atin metubeh pihh ah 
PCE pan, atlemai? petal d-cikuahihe mend, pilunen nboedinnh 
Murino, —qithtawduuhs Oh hi hti-ayals ’ 
“mahten | HUE OMe auTaininiwah LY Hayihtam CHO CORE LHD, 
taht hh: ahdns Pepa pies hantah pibtikehanind pittunta ta 
mhihtitgih, Mtn ae ede n Hh-pikihtawedtamuyit Mmientunih, <dapiint hls 
dh-itakutipik, kuntan k-ohpwahayit menaluhh Pingek honk tahtuh kes wi PU: 
Multi, pthtukahanihls whtal, kiythan mahthhanah, naenatuhh nah Wenn, 
matichih pihte Cheathe-Thatd pahtayit, Ate nd napiati ayia nem kdhes 
weed htakintydin, methyekueir, Dueceuctarmealeaneh dihemuhyukahihat 


L444 RUTH cote aes nucle’ with lip-roundline eat the ond, 


t 


a 


a 


dah Equhydtiukan dh ndpdieiait, dh aakatamidat dh ate ndtacpahat be 
ies mahi adie mdtadtdu, —orgnah hadyahtiih, kite rata pabaw, | 
ited, 
A, tepid taimatioatowah, — hiaduamain aid heantndtauiatt, —iitand 
haha dad aipuodhtdie  hadtah dhiteh ana panko, lah oad ndyah ha- 
hth: anna thi cae uta mapdaia, Aheitah chin midi netyah, dh nal 
nawayand, «diate adn plyhwaniyiw dh-tatahh.  ahyadidie 1 adh 
sede, potdh weatmimah panda neciahhanithy 

dhaah ama dahedata, “waht, nda, pityahid poh he kilahomeatiggah 
hinchahhsntne dhe ta-paapaprydh. — pdhtakwahhd prhtukahanihk, mindy, 
nokta, nih aawalin ane dink he hih-mahyakuhat unahahhionea, mil 
Wah pand: widhthuuhhih Hhaythihh tikuathhihe aya hinahahhrn, bike: 
nitude wind, “dhdge nuhtaiw katie wepabtaniale cythuble taebsal bed 
bigvahe dbo fui akugih it kihedfuhhenamane pihtibahanihh, | ite ohta 
HUE A ORAL ‘ 

‘_ hatahtaiwed redetecad dh 

aabinahitih, Hw ankatale 2 ke thd yit agmatine, pater bee 
pdhtdhwanigik matikahpihk, tapinkote mibtodahpah ath nmtqiktl, fnple ite 
prhtuhd pajyit mandinnah, hahha ad afpahoht 

jul awd pahtukaey awa ndpauin, "nd, meliikaltake te de parece 
ayiniyeutioals de mibtottitnik 2M igatahedtad, an ani pipe tied inn 
dthad nthe, mo ae 
"ancyeereetie wid jpe seed peewdel ile yard, 

Ahiaenh otth pthtulahenihh th mated sein ohtawieawd, "ana kiya 
wnat ody, kiya, hinahahkinar pide aicatindh fawaka ublat ah 
wiginil bool niyian 1! dle tthe, ay apie (itty tere parnpa pai, 

dha ohi matukakpihl cayinigeniedk ahah whinitt, © awe hia, 
warnuan dy 2 wig kit olfnahh, aitiath kabkiypan ayiayiniedk ah 
wohimiht, ahah matukahpihh ah tatedwertamiyt awaniieh, —pithtanema 
ki hihtd-ayak, — okd wiya utawtaimiaah wagaualimihik ay gayi, wait 
wnddhhdnmiwitid, bdehdawe keamated takeuhieygdlt wnahahbder nian, 

hati, dhiwah wiginah kit duah kit awatawal kaltamep faking, utnid 
tacmauniydh kite adinahhth, — kahbryaw mutakukpihk lenyptakanat be 
dyahih, dkutah kit ataladawate: wich, nan otah hittituitakanseahh tan 
(nite dh-wiytnitt dythunih kit olinedwak, cyanah bitaweutinahhiky te 
ait 2" (tod awa napduin k-onamitnaninit "ihn totulikwawt, aka 
pecprepitioeiod, talk dha belt dan ned pai, nile aed prospar pr tinaing, 
mony feomiunpayiio, kina ane piydwukan nata/pahate, pdyateman 
hitdapaylie, aha panpapltwaud boltawig kill ning, imma hi nat: 
alpahdtnl vihdreukan, dleagthahh dtukd le hab nrpiniainancedie wedge 
mrindihd hik-cyduawar’. payne Keep mania nie pehyawukan, ult 
mind, dh hiimakdyinytahte= dike woldadhkaiiyeth he ah-gutysddubtayahhs haki- 
qdhhey ) tihe ©  yoritamawahhan fohtanly hikawiy i onde wapalkihe ta 
nitiipahaw plhdwuksea, dluteh alas nanitaw ndwudtipinkels aie fanatic: 
poh, plyiah miatcht Wik ayanawaw niinindn, "ito seonkimakanah, 

dheaad dhwah papal maandtaed wah ok dadradith.  bituhtawd wlineniah 
> mitadahnntion pah-pdyah,  prhtukatdionl wiktoahk, dkiah ah aatamatabhele 
miportanigiwe, wentuhdnthaniih: apandlhe dhatah lahkeupllanavak, 

outta ttuodie cor ke ondmitnnnint ¢ "withing, akaye vwrhkeds atinamuk oe 
needing wth’ ntplalaah awa piheruukan, itd, 


+ 


Bs . | 


pahtanewah oki kahtd-ayak. oo 

‘a, dyakunih k-Gh-pimdtiaiyahk, dh-titamdikuydhh mitatwin, nitawd- 
siminitih kaya wihkaty sdininanuh ahpoh ainahahkisimak wipialatwdwa, 
wiy d-wahihtdtak £" ihoediw awa kisdyiniw, 

dkuah wiydpanivik, ndlatpahdw ae dwaala pdyoh ka-hlydmdwiait, 
payee iih-tolah bike Phtukdpayiykwa mustuawa, — pdyakwantyiw 
dh-tahediotamiyit ayiaiyiniea audalsah aina, akdy dewih-paapdpitaih, 
hahkiyaw kwaydtal-olyanthtaikdangylwa bhi muyatuawah,  adshwdta hachapils 
hiath dh-dwatidtaih windaah he kdltd-ayak, . 

Ghual matukithpihh dh-aakatanuht Ohi taipitaikanah mituath d-sdk- 
wakinahhitaih (yikuhh, adiytwal Oh davdalsak, 

hiwah Gada wed awa, k-Gxdmitadnialt ndpdaia s yitim, aaamindn. 
aamahindn. miakola litahtawd anna ubatakubtdndu, dhutah la-mital- 
wah, dhedw aa ndpdaia h-Gadinltsdutalt, - 

hipud mipdwaly habkdiakwah aninah wiyinwah minah ulakiatya d~ 
parka pi ikeitcrn ict edaduapahtahhih, dhun dh-titdhtach, dhawuh wayautwak 
Waheed pa, 

"him, prhdwukaa, nahtdhkatdwak Gki Olah oak keGh-pitait ukimdu, 
maakt dkutd ituhidian, kubkundnaw atav-daamdtan, Ud, 

aha’, itd awa ndipdaia . . 

ubpiwak, naydwala dh-piaakutathhik, aitiadh dw-utdkuaiatiih, utéh- 
tamiwak: mikiwdhpah dh-mlhadulybih. 

ahiih Ghi dakwdaiach pikinkatdwak undpdamiwdwa, dhdy dhepdhtawdtail 
Hah dite-tatwdiwdlamiyet. 

dhwuh ndbih tak dh-aakdyh dhutah pakltatwak, 

hau, pihdwukdaa, ndhad kindadudylailin kiyah, nutya mahtih: nka- 
niuapamdwak 6b didaiaak, ? dw avitedwdbanah. 

dhptedi-plldiedt, aiituahh todhdw, . 

“dy ¢ antamitik | awa pihdw 1" tvdwak awdatach, 

pimwodwak, —iydta-pimauhtar awa pihdw, ubpihiaw, — klaiiwih todhdw, 
dkua Ob awaaisak ndsdskawdwok mihtadt, kitahtawd wihyaw adh-ituhtahdl, 
voakials ubpahaw, ath ha-hih-nakalat uuitidwdkanah, dhutah hodhéw, 
haw aaniaiwin, dhiwak mitihitioah ah dwaaaah,  kdkd-tipiakdyio.  dyui- 
huhh dh-pd-kidtai aki awastaak, néh-nakishawdwak,  wahkundkwak, dh- 
Kiprakawatak, niway aydwuk ; ayia kunt itd al-kwahkunikwak,  dhetita! 
wah-panihotwdid, kutakah dhekwdihkunikutaik, piyiak ndway aydwak, adhe 
alitipaakayil, wapahtanwak patukdaloah wikiagiw, windpakkwawihanik. 

‘dak amd, pihawukan, kéhhuminaw wikih, pihtukdlan,  dkutah 
nipeihahh, namuye ta-hih-kiwdyahh anuhta, ? iwdwah, . 

aha itwaw awa ka-hiydmdwinit. 

tthiah ih-pihtubdtaik, hd, ndhba } blak nka-taimetwdlundn kiliake 
wahitienihh f ; 

“dhe, noatsimiaiih 2? dtikwwule, 


dihwah dékutuh ma-mdlawdwak, dhelaimatwdtutath, _ plyiate dihelipia- 


hayth puytiwak, 


dhignh nahi ishvwialaak, ahd dokih-nipdlaih; hitdpahtemwale Gh atauataah 


wan, -awatebe wimekaniyien, Aildpahtamwah Gk takwdataak, 
ahiwah udhi neépdatnak, vi nésisinutik, dkwah nin dhtdhineasin. 
vtawi-nipah dkwal, kiwik, ninéhldhkwaain, ” 


Probably cond ivatexs in olther ease we have a verb-form whieh ta not fuished, but 
in re-eommoneod in the wah of the next word, : 


2kh 


Ahwah awe keGadaitadndat Gala Udo 6“ nGhho, name ndnilaw niha- 

hth-nitpdndn, " dhedtwit, 
ahs daay nipdiouk ndldh ndma kihid-ayak,  dlaoah aki cakwdataak 

hettinahhil: uh dtvualaah, dhewaskmainakaniyihkih, bitahtawd ha-pithtahteth 
dhepikdakwayit, Gh dlauataeh dh-pikiaodmakahkih. awa qlwipiniait tania 
dheftodt, dhutah pihiakwew wiplaiathh ¥ 

“nimdad, na matatkdttak datan 1 rituhtawdldnile witin dhwah hittin 
tinier dhodtaih 1" 

Ghauad Ghd dheitwdmakahhi atausiaah, itodgiwe, dhwah nituhiewdwat, 
wihyaw déh-aydlaih, \ a 

dhwah awe ndlukdaiw hedtdt untatna,  nbhhé, naniaeya ndaslaw vwildata 
niwthihkdmundn, letgaiydthl dyp-aydad-wthihkdauydhh, tdnidhl dun, ndhkeu, 
ahd keth-mitlarmayin ?? itdw Ohh, 
“hay, adalat, namuya ume maniygwd aolyak dhewttainu, dhendhtdh- 
hatdhh @ma, dla Ieiakityghtitndtrodtn, nhka-hitindkdylmdwak nialaimeals, 
ndatainitih, dwakw dna nipdkdhkdk, ” utandukdniyiwd dh-iatwdpindyit, WW 
npaikdtatk, Hs ; 
; hd, nohkd, aw dwa wiya pihdavitkaas dh-pd-ntaw-asamiak 1" ohe 
tdwah, dhemedydlath hahkdwalawa mine vwiytnava, 7 

“Ahua, néataimdtih | Gtah awah ulimdw vuldtnviaaligs | awiyak nta- 
minahtdindt ima ntildnaw, dwakuh abednahdhkiatmin,’ dhttindl, pilyak dla 
dskaw waih-wihkdla, nipahdw ukwiakwapayihbaah ; — medka wantuya— tithe 
ldpahiutiwak uapbnioiwak uatin apinin, dhemihtadtihk, " (bode mia notule 
dato; “ndalad, niwih-kawiaimun, Uap dheutah nka-miteinun, " dhwdiw awa 
néitukdaiw, \ 

nipdwaly dhwoh dhe dakaodatsah, ateuniach tahkananwak,  dhsitwdme 
ahantythih, nhuhtawdaale wundptimivinoer, 

hay, pihdwukaa, maht dkwah ntawi-notiakwdwd 1 aw ukimdaw uldniaah 
atawihenttinkrwdiwda 1" 

“ha, make min dail dni whemikuakdtisiyan 1" ildw awa usd. 

“hd, wiy denihwdytncuyin, kedgydin (tat wiya Pb? 

“hity, nindad, whmahod-nitiakwddiw dhwah kindpdim 1) ihodyiwa 
uldndaah awa, 

ha, utuhtamwak, d-pdkupayitath, a 

dhwah awa dtuhtiw awa ndpdsia, ahwoh awa kutak- hd-kiydmdwintt . 
nemnwata dhwah wankdwimakaniyiw wiplaia; ayia nip; awa pikuh 
k-Badadttadndatl ha-waskawtmakaniylh wiptata, dkwah nlawi-ndtakawdwdw, 


dhepthtukdl, “mahtih wasaskuldnah 1!" dhodw. awa ukimdw awa udn- 


avaah* 

pot hi awiataah dhekildpamileut, wiat dhelkitdpamdl, kd-wih-pahpiygt 

“datawinah 1" thodw aw daleintiinkwiw, Ly, 

dstawinamwin Om lakuldw,  dleuai kawinimto, — niadhiwdmiwak, 
kutakah dakwdwah dheutindt Ateimunawdu dh-mtaihldlaik, 

“Ohth hedhtahtikih mikiwihpah kahkiyaw umatukdhppédhk tdwipit- 
aikanah sd-adkaskindwah., — kihtwdm mleaapity-ituhtdn pin hihtewiy 
kika-wihtamuvdw, kthepthtukdydnd ; dkunpe hackle niwaw, keita-wihe » 
tam = hohidary. ‘nina ilih dhapihtukdydn, hikedithimuntawdw,.  dhurn 
wapahki nku-ktwdndn ; nipi-witadwiw nisin, hd, dhuat,  niwiheltuwdn, 
kdkdta wipan ” : ; 

“aha,” th. 

WO18O -10 


o 


- wdeteal. 


@ . AKG 


dks wayauiw, — prhtuldao thhumah wikiyihk, kawinmow., mayaw 
ka-kawininut, ndma awtpinin kamwdtaddyiw,  nipdwak, wiydpaniyik, 
hikendpa hiwilwith dwaddkuniniyile takusinwak wikiwahk. 

“fantih éma d-kih-aydydh 7" ittkwak ufwiwawa, 

“ha, iytkuhk ah-kitayahk ka-kth-nimahiyik, dhkeepileuhk k-Ghepd- 

hiedyahle, nadir azine. kd-Kthenimahiyahk, ” tdwak, 

hun Ahewipaniyik, naleipahiiin wima-rentnimdty. Chunt mihtedt pdsiwdw 
manta, leh lwam tthewapaniyil, Asay ming nitulamadw kita-nimataik ; 
dkanah Tah teaniyuneit miteiuin miyawak misahi, dhuet kikadpd wayaur- 
auntk, maya theakawdwmdtak, uhpiwak. .pdyakwan ; dw-uldkusiniyik, 
 takusinwik, *~ dunt pihtukdwak oh humiwawee wihiyihk dkwah sdmak 

” miyihwul hkumiuiun ta-nipakdlaik. ” mayaw d-Liprakayil miydwak oh- 

humiwdud, h 

“dhemiywastkih, nokhké, hi kanawdyihtah, with kiksdpa ntum- 
imithken, eur okimaw ulaninah : ilap ta-pdy-ituhtaw, " al bhkumah. 

nla wikiwithk ntuhtawaw, wipiniathk whisi. 

“dkw onth wah-uwiskwiyin, nimish 1”) itimdwa wlanina. 

ikeus dh-tipiskayik, ntawi-notinkidwiw, tdpwd kdkedits _Gewapaniyik, 
pd-kiwdw. asay waniakdyiwa usima, 

“ mistahi kimin-wandtahkamikisin 1 itik usima. 

“ kiy Oma ka-misi-wandlahkamikisiyin 1” ttdw. 

ntuhtawdwak wipisisiwahk uhtsi,. niawals dskaw dh-pdhpitstk ok tsk- 


. dhw d-kisikak, “hd, nohké, ntawi-ntum awa eueind island ! miydhkan 
bhi 5 lta-kiu aihhatinw. masks” ta-ki-pimdtisiwak ayleiyiniwak, utihtahkwawi 
umatukahpiwdwa, ” ildw éhkuma., _ 

eo hwah nlawi-ntumid. TT en - ? 
“ nésted, -absiyaw, “kiwih-piy-atuhtan nikihk,  d-whisi-ntumitan, usdm 
npapasiméls’ nosisim. ildp wiya kik-dleimustak. ” . 
“dha,” ildw. 
iuhidw. dhapihtulil, _awin hi, ; kth-apiyiwa hd-notiskwdwankut. 
nahapistawdw., ne 

- “haw, oh ohi k-oh-ntumildn.- dkusi maka pdyakwaw. kih-kapdsihk, 
dkutah nk-Gh-sipwihténdn, "dtiw; “hd, dkwah kd-ki-wihtamdtan kohtauny 
kita-wihtam, oma, kay-itwdyan. “i 1Bp hi misthiaw kd-kih-nakattht umanét- 


—~gimdkanah awa,” itdw usima ; “ didist. _ 


; iy, dkust kiwiéw aw uskiniliskwiw, bhtiwiya nlumdw wikihk yhtst. 
“" “ nohtd, Glah pi-pihtukidw awdsis, dkust dah dh-nipdydn dk h nipaw. 

. “‘misihtaw kitsi-kisdyiniw ka-Kth-nakatiht. ‘ tahtuh k-ahtahtikih matukahpah, 
dku-tahtuh thtahtinwah lisipiteckana, wiydsah dh-aleutikih, * itwdw kinahdh- 
kisim ; ’ ‘ dkust kit-det-wihtam,’? ch-init k-ch-isi-avthtaman, ” 

a aha’ ynlanis. mastaw kiya kitaydn;*napdw ’ d-pakusihidyin. kakwd- ~ 
‘miyu-pimatisi. kitimakdyim ana kiskwa,”? itdw utdnisah. 

G, wihtam » “ kika-pitsindnaw gnuhts. matwi~misihtaw nitsi-kisdyiniw ; 


matwd-misihtiw. sdekewats itah kaAtw-bh-pitsiydk, dkutah ka-kapdsindwaw,” ‘ 
ttwdw d-wihtamawdl utayisiyinim - = 
_ldpwdpitsiwak: kahkiyaw. itéh ah-kapdsitsik, dsay mina “ntawi-ndtisk- _ 


_wioiw awa. kikedpad kiwiw. hah, takusinwak wikiwahk. - 
_— had, mayaw dh-pihtukat, “ nitim, kdhkwéyim kiwikimakan ! dyakunth 
ukimawa uldnisiyiwa, dyakunih ch-wiwit, ” itdw usima. 


a a 287 ; 

“nd, mim, kiy bma kd-wiwiyin. kinituhldtin oma tahkih,”’ itik 
witimwd, § . ae ; 

“alii, nlawisimisitik, kwaydlsi-panahamuk itah kita-wtkit kimisi- 
waw, kyulak mina kohtdwiyiwiw ; niswayak kika<pinahindwaw," itdw. 

lépwd papilsiwak, adskwals kapdsimustawiwak. dhkuyikuhk ati-kdh- 
ktaupwdyayiw. Sy ae LO 
vA dkusi dkewah, “haw, nistm, 10 
kipakwatik, dkwah pdyak aya nipial 


or 


i oe . 
wpahahkan, aswiyim maka: pityale 
wilil ; maka nika-misawihadw niya,” 
h, piydsiwotwdwi mustuswak,” itdw. 


dw ; “ dkdya wihkdls wihpeegyimuh 
’ ttdw. 


(uta; “kiya. nikdn natstpahahkan, 
“ aha’ ,” ith. ; 
kiksdpa sipwihtdw. pdyakwaniyiw éh-totahk, dh-mawatsihtat mustusu- ~ 

miya; pdyakwaniyiw dy~isi-tdpwdldl. pasikoyiwa. kawipaythows pi- 
nikdnuhtawdy,. makuhok d-sakiskampyit Ghi mustuawah walaniyah, pas- 
oy parla’ jk-dtayah dh-dhutswiwit awa\kd-hiydmdwisit, hdw, d-wdslahamd- 
miht okt mustuswah, nama ki-sdkupayihow ; kdsindtakutsin ; sdpu-pimuh- 
iw.  d-wih-dta~pakiteil, nama kih-puketsiw. ~ vydyaw d-nipisihkupaytk, 

_ sydyaw dkuld ispihdw, kitahtawd kdkway ispimthk k-oh-pdtuwdkuldyth. 

nama kihitdpiw ; pimi-lawikipayihik.’ nama Kihmaskwénik, pdyakwan- 

“hk waskdhakutsiniyiwa, ‘ 
dkwah awa k-ssdmitsonisit, “ dhdhdy, nistm misi-wandtsihow | mahti 

nka-ntawdpumdw 1” itwdw. ° ea _ 
' wayawiw ; utsahtsdpiyah utindw ; dkwah ohih nisu alsusisah ulinam..- -- 

pot shi sakahk kih-pimisiniyiwa usima, dy-utihtat, dkutah kisiwak akusiyi- 

wa pipunasiwa. a , . 

“hay 1” itéw; “hdy | pdyokwan ma kdy-tsindkusiyin, dkust kik- 
dsindkusin. usdm ayisiyiniwak wilsdwatwdwi, lahk dyiwak kika-totdan, 
nisawdts dkust pikuh kik-dei-mitsisun, dma kd-tdlaman !” itdw. 

nama kih-kwiéskiméw; nama kih-ayisiyiniwiw. dwakuni “ kipak- 
watik” kay-itiht awa ké-nipahiht paspaskiw. dkwah usima. ispahkdw 
wipisis ; kutak mina d-<ispahkil, pasikéyiwa usima ; pimdlsihdw. 

tydyaw pihtukahanthk ituhtdw ; potih ayisiyiniwah wapamdw, dh- 
akusiyit pihtukahanthk. . utihtimandhtanah kikiskawdyiwa. nihtstpaythow 
aw k-dsdmitsénisit, dh-ntunahk mohkumdnitusdpisk. oe — 

. Yaoo ! .d-kanawdyihtaman anima, mdstatéw, nimbhkumdnitusd- 
pisk If 
kitapamdw ; mihkowiyiw um otethtsty. dmisi totam. 
: “key étukd, mdstatdw 1” 

Gh-ilat, kuntah apsi-kahkakisa kd-muskéwdpahwat uskisikuyihk. ; 

“6tah ntawats kiya-pakusihdwak ayisiyiniwak | namuya ka-kih- 
kwdskimun ! kdsiydpih ; kika-wapin anima 1” itéw. co 

/ nama kih-kwdskimow. . woe 

“-sakahk kik-dhiépanihun 1" itéw. , BR A de, 

ke ahataht awa, uhpihdw; kunt ita ismhaw. nama kih-ayisiyiniwiw 
dwih: : . . : ie 


oe tee  coeemnetl 


1T here translate pihydw : “partridge,” ‘and paspaskiw: “quail,” arbitrarily, for. 1 
could not identify the birds; interpretera sny “partridge” for both. The brother here: 
called paspaskiw was above named pihdwukas. : ‘ 


83180-7104 ; o on 


288 


“nthamila kd-wadpahk niathkahk ;  ndtatpahdhkahk, ” itwdrw awa ke 
badoniladniait, “ dkutah kit jyanowalayahkul Okt aytatyintwak, ” didw usima ; 
“und namuya kwayank wiy-lapayiw, aypleryiniwak tu-nthtawikiwak; Gtah 
aakihk,’ tai kawi stam Gwdyahkuk Om dakdy,” dw usima. 

“ dha’ ," ittihe ee 

dlewah "niniwale, dhewdpaniyihk, dhendtstpahdtsik, hd, ndid mustuswah 
usthdwak ;  kinndhtahdwak mtstahi mihtsdt, toikawdsis dkwah d-pihtukd- 
payiyit, awa pihiw mdstakayttdsah kilitdudw ; ; awa paspaskiw mdstakay- 
ildaah kikildadw. “dkwah muhydpitasdkéwak, mistahi miyusiwak. nisukd- 
pawiwak, d-mdststhdlsik shi mustuswah, adliht ayisiyiniwak éh-mékwa- 
wiyinihtakdwiht, pd-ntaw-asamawak minsdpuy. , 

“hiw, aplniyinitik, nisawdgs kiyawdw nandtuhk kik-dtowiwindwaw. 
tahtuh pirtakiw kodhtantt, nandluhk kik-dsi-pimdtsthundwdw. kahkiyaw 
ayisiyiniw kika-wakolechikuwdw uhptkitsth ota nikan. dkwah niyah aldh 
tawiythk nik-dydn, kd-nistitetk fitsahkusak, kakikd nika-pimdtisin. dkwah 
awa nisim, Gtdh ta-nisiwak alpahkusak, kakikd ta-pimdtisit nistm. usdm 
wiyaxiwdw kihtdwiyinaw ta-sifawiyahk, askthke kit-dhpikihitut ayisiyiniw. ” 

dkuyitkuhle dskwak atays, hkdwin, 


Then at one time some boys, from over a hill, from the north, a boy 
came into sight, and another one, also a boy, from the west, and they 
carried throwing-sticks i in their hands, and walked to a‘rise in the land. 
When one of’ them, the second one, threw a throwing-stick up the hill, 
and it sped through. the air, the one of whom first 1 spoke, saw it. Again 
he threw a dart,.and it, too, flew through the air. The boy of whom-I 
spoke first went up the hill to fetch hig dart. 

“Yoho! So.here he is! To be sure, ‘He is going off to take a wife,’ 
was said of you!’*said he who had come from the west. . 

“Oh nol; I darcsay it is you, really, who mean-to take a wife!’”’ said he 
who came- fgom the north. = 

But, “You were going off to take a wife!” he told him. 

Ther they descended the hill-and went to the deserted camp-site.._-—— 
One was not white. He-who had come from_the-tiorth-was white; he was 
bashful; this one -did-not speak much. But the’ other one was silly and 
talked too much and was a babbler. 

4a “Now then, right here let us play throwing-stick!”’ said the talkative 
Or 


“|p hey continued to play there. ‘ 

Presently those children, those girls, heard the noise which the lads 
. were muking there. 

“Oh, father, surely those two children who are playing with throwing- 
sticks have been abandoned here. Surely they have been abandoned, 
just as we have!’ 


L 
! 


ae Oo 


= a 
Ne CET 


289 


“Yes, childron.. So put the lodge in order at the other side of the 
fire. Go play with them, cach of you with one. That will keep you from 
being lonesome, if you play with them. Go invite them,” those girls were 
to 

Late in the afternoon those girls went there. Of those who are talk-. 
ative, such was the elder girl. The younger was not given to much speech. 
Of those boys, too, it was the elder who was o prattler. 

So, when they came to where the others were, ‘You are to come to” 
our house and play with us!” 

“Look at the girl you are going to'marry!” said the prattler; ‘Yah, 
do not forget you came here to take a wife! Go stay with your wifo’s 
people!” he said to his younger brother, 

“But it is you are planning to take a wife, not I,” the bashful one 
answered him. 

““Yes! Now he has told you!’ the prattler said to them. 

Then the girls ran back home. They all stayed there. * * 

Then at one time; as they played with throwing-sticks by the door, 
‘Now then, Partridge-Claw!”’ said the one, calling his junior by yame; 
“Whichever ‘is beaten will drive in the buffalo. Tomorrow let us make 
the buffalo run into this old buffalo-pound here. Qur father-in-law is 
suffering too much from hunger, what with their eating nothing but soup,” 
he said to him. 

. “Very well,” the other answered him. 

They pitched their throwing-sticks. Partridge-Claw was beaten. 
The babbler gaily whooped. 

“T have beaten him! Now he will be the one to drive in buffalo!’ 
he paid of the other. 

Then, when they went to bed, he said to his wife, “Let not your father 
and your mother peek out from the lodge, when they hear anything; I am 
going to drive in buffalo. Be sure to tell them. If they do not peek out, 


* em 


.then, when' the noise ceases, your father and mother are to come out of 


the lodge; they will go to the pound,” he told his wife. 

Accordingly, just before dawn, the bashful boy went away. When he 
had gone far, day broke, and he drove buffalo. -He took a great amount of 
buffalo-dung, and laid it in little heaps in a row. 

Then he said, ‘“Hey hey heyey!” 

When he gave this cry, great numbers of buffalo rose from the ground. 

‘‘Heyeyeyey hey hey hey!” be-cried. 

Thereupon-they ran off. He brought a great herd with him. 

~"Presently,' ds morning passed and it was nearing noon, the waving of 
signals began, 

He heard people calling, ‘“Hold the dogs, lest : ‘they bark!’’—~so cried 
the one who called out directions while the herd was awaited. 

Then they heard a great crowd of men, and dogs baying everywhere 
in that deserted camp, and loud whooping as though of their fellow ~campers, 
as the buffalo ran into the enclosure. —_- 

“Now, father; ‘Let him at no time peek out!’ said your son-in-law! 
thus spoke that girl. 

And that other boy, the talkative one, “Nonsense! Let them look out 
at a sight worth seeing! Let thein see how many people ther. are!’’ said 
that boy. 


py 


20 


ad 


sub that woman, whenever her husband wanted to poop tind see tho 
people who wore making all tho noise, then just in time the, old woman 
wottld hold back her husband, But the girls could see the poopie nd the 
dogs running hithor and thither about the deserted catnp, ‘Thon, whon 
only ono buffalo was left, the people whooped overywhore, Tho old people 
heard them. 

“T do wonder! Surely these must be people!” thought sho, the woman. 

Sho peeped out through the door: from all over tho buffalo-pound 
smoke was rising into the air, the steaming bronth of buffalo rising into the 
atmosphere, and at the same time all kinds of animals, as many. an alay 
through the winter, caine forth from the pound, all kind of wolves, every 
kind of wolf, and ran offside and away from the deserted camp. The boy 
came home. There was simply nothing left, His spell had Ween broken; 
his parent-in-law had spoiled his luck. 

“Yaha, Partridge-Claw is coming empty-handed and ashamed, for 
all his buffalo driving!” he said to him; Lot us play again. Whichover is 
beaten, let him fetch buffalo,” ho said, 

. Accordingly, they played throwing-stick. Tho prattlor was beaten. 
Very carly in the morning he set out, Then on that other stretch of - 
prairie, there where the other boy had taken buffalo-dung, from there he 
now took buffalo-dung, Jaying it ina row. ‘Thfls one did the same as the 
other had done. '“Hoyeyey!” he cried, and there, a great herd of buffalo 


*_ rosgeto their feet. 


Then that girl, “Iather, mother, once and for all time your son-in-law 

forbidden you to peer out. When the noise beging at the corral, do you, 
father, hold back my mother, Plainly it was she who spoiled things for her 
son-in-law, When the sound has entirely died away, thort after your son- 
in-law who has now gone away returns, then you will fetch the moat, Do 
not try to see things before that time. Only when your son-in-law arrives 
here are you to go to the pound,” she told her father and her mother. 

Presently: the signals were waved. ‘ 

“Young men! Go lie in wait!” cried the people, and all over the 
abandoned camp-site the noise began, just as if the tents were yet there, 
and then the buffalo came running into the corral and were all killed. 

Kiven though he, that boy, said, “Nonsense, it is worth secing, the 
crowd of people!” yet neither of his parents-in-law peeked out. 

But thoy themselvey could see the people. . . 

_ Then, right there from the buffalo-pound they héard their father 
being galled by name, “Jt is you, Buffalo-Dung, whose son-in-law is bring- 
ing the buffalo! That is why 1 am giving you the fattest onc!” he was 
told, but he stayed right where ho was; he would not peer out, 

Then when the peoplo who had lived in that now deserted carp were 
called, now one, now another, by name, “This one is for you, Buffalo- 
Dung!” (meaning that he was to take the meat), whon all the people, 'to 
the last one, were called by name, and when even the children were noising 
about in the abandoned camp, that old couple heard them all, But his 
children were outside, with the old people’s son-in-law. Presently they 
heard their son-in-law arrive. 

_ “There now, now let your father and mother go fetch the meats, and 
let them take some for you to eat. On all the drying-framés that are on 
the camp-site let them hang the meats, and for this drying-frame of yours. 


‘ 


Jot thom inké the fattest one, lo provide ment for then to eat! said the 
boy who wan prittler; Of they qe this way and do not poop, (hinges will 
always woos well as this, But if they peep, things will nob go wall. Jven 
if Partridge-Claw hors drives buffalo, sings will yo just as well, if only 
your father and your mother do not try to look. By the tine Partridge- 
Claw has had two turns at driving in buffalo, there will be enough, £ guess, 
for a stay over the summer, You will have a big supply of meat. This 
Partridge-<CGlaw in not really a child, And f, fo01 beams wo felt sorry 
for you when you were starving, is why we came to your dwelling,” ho 
told her; “Toll your father and mother; tomorrow again Partridge-Claw 
is to drive buffalo. Some four days after that be is to drive them ayein, . 
In the end you will have a hig supply of food,’ he told his wife. 

Then those children wént about playing, Then at one time cach of 
thom took a stick of saskatoon willow, They brought them into the lodge 
and put feathers on them, to make arrows, They were pretly, Shey tied 
them to the master-pole by which tho tent, is rained, + h 

Thus spoke the pratiler: “Sister-in-law, do you and the others never 
tuke these; Sartridge-Claw is very particwar abont my arrows,” ho told 
her. ’ 

> ‘The old folks heard this, See 

“Now, it is to them we owe our lives, since they have provided food for 
us, children! Neyer so much as touch my sons-in-lawy’ arrows, since they 
are particular about them!” said the old. man. , 

Then, the next morning, the child’ who. was bashful went buffalo 
driving. ‘They always did it in the sume way. The buffalo ran into the 


“pound. Feven as before, the people and the children made their din, and 


a 


they did not peer out. All the buffalo were skinned and eut up for them 
beforehand, so that without delay the old couple could, set: about fetching 
in moat day after day. ; ae te 

Then, when the drying scaffolds that had been Jeft on the abandoned 
dite were all full, the children ceased, a . 

Then the byy who was a pratilor spoke: “Sister-in-law, give us food. 
Give us provisions for the way. ‘Perhaps some time wo shall not get home; 
let us have food to eat off there,” said the boy who was a prattler. 

Accordingly, they were given pieces of dried meat and of fat meat 
and tripe, nicely wrapped into a bundle for them to carry on their backs. 
When this had been done for them, then early in the morning they went out 
of the tipi. 

“Now, Partridge-Claw, that chicf who moved away from this camp 
and his people are starving. Let us go there, Let us go giveour grand- 
mother food,” he said to the other. 

“Very well,” said that boy. 

They rose from the ground, flying through the air. Late in the after- 


“noon they reached the place where there were many tents. 


Meanwhile those girls felt lonely for their husband 
hear them at their noisy play. 
But those others alighted in a grove of t¥ces. 
“Now, Partridge-Claw, I have no confidence in your powers. Let me 
be the one to go see those children,’’/he said to his comrade. : 
He flew up in the farm of a partridge. He settled on a poplar tree. 
‘Hey! Come here! See this partridge!” cried the children. 


s, when they did not 


a 


~, 


aft give 


202 


They shot arrows abit. Although tho partridge was shot at, it flow 
up, Clone by it settled again, So the childron chasod it hard, Prosontly, 
when ho had drawn thom off a fone ways, suddonly ho flew up. ‘There 
whore he had left his comrade, he enmo down. £fo turnod buck into a 
child. ‘fhon thoy followed those children’s tracks, It was almost night. 
When those children were coming home, (hoy begin mocting them one after 
nother, ‘Tho children pushed thom over and blocked their way. They 
wor in the rear; for at ovory point the others pushed them over. Whon- 
over thoy tried to get on their feet, others pushed them ovor, until they were 
in tho rear, When night camo on, thoy suv an old woman's littl tent, a tipi 
of old bites of Jeather. ; 

“This is our grandmothor’s dwolling, Partridge-Claw, Lot us go in, 
Let us sleep here. We cannot get homo today,” they said. 

“Very well,” said the bashful one, 

Then, aa they entered, “Tfoy, grandmother! Lot us play with our 
(throwingestieks hero by your doorway!” 

“You, my grandchildren!’ she said to them. 

Then they continued to play there with their throwing-sticksx, At 
Jast, when th was dark, they ceased. 

Meanwhile those girls yonder, who hid not gone to sleep, looked at 
those two arrows, The things were moving. The girls watched them. 

And the boys off there, “Hey, my grandchildren, now I am sleepy. 
Go and sleep now. Go home. I am sleepy.” ws 

Yhen the prattler said to her, “Grundmotlier, 
place for us to sleep.” wats wr 

OSf buck yonder that old couple was alrearly asléep, And as those girls 
picked up the arrows which were moving, suddenly they heard someone 
speak, ax if those arrows were speaking. Whatever the owner of the 
urrow said, he spoke in the arrow there. . 

: “Pig sister, this is great, come here! Let us listen to my brother-in- 
law,and to your brother-in-law aud hear what they say!” ; 

So now, whatever those arrows said, the others wore saying. And 
they listened to them, though they were far away. 

And when that old woman had thus spoken to her grandchildren, 
“Grandmother, we never stay unywhere with people, but pay at most 
4 little visit here and there. How is it, grandmother, that you do not eat?” 
he asked his grandmother. 

‘Alas, grandchild mine, no one at all cats here, for here is a famine. 
But surely you know this. I shall befriend my grandchildren. My grand- 
sons, use this to sleep on,” and she tossed them her sleeping-mat, for them 
to sleep on, 

“Well, grandmother, but this Partridge-Claw here has come to give 
you food!’ they said to her, and gave her pieces of dried and of fat meat. 

“Thank you, my grandsons. Now, the chief here, concerning his 
daughter, ‘If anyone kills game for my town here, him I shall take for my 
son-in-law,’ he has said, but, though from time to time one or another 
kills a deer, yet the people do not get enough to go round, It is too little, 
what with the great number of them,” said the old woman; “Now, grand- 
son, I want to liedown. Now I shall be able to eat,” said the old woman. 


The girls off yonder had gone to sleep. They held the arrows in their 
bands, When the things spoke, they listened.to their husbands. 


there will not be any 


208 


“oy, Partridge-Claw, do you now go courting! Go court this chief's . 
danghtor!” ; 

“Sin, so it sooms you arc again making trouble!” he said to his older 
brother. a 
“Hoho, if you do not care to, it may as well be 17, 

“Oh, big sistor, it seys your husband is going courting!” raid that 
man’s daughtor. — : 

Thoy listenod to it, waking up. 

Thon that boy wont there. Then the arrow of the other boy, the one” 
who was bashful, did not move at all, for he slept; only the prattlor’s 
arrow bobbed up and down. Then he went courting. ; 

When he entered the lodge, “Mrke the firo bright!” said the chief's 
daughter. 

Then, when shoe beheld the child looking at her, and in tarn gazed at 
him, hesmiled’at her. 

“Put out the fire!’ said the young woman. . 

The fire was put outforher. * * * * * * # # # HH OM 
He told her of how they had acquired a.supply of ment. 

“Of as many tents ay are in their camp-site? all the drying-seaffolds 
are filled. I shall come back here. When I do #6, you will toll your father, 
when I shall have. come into the tent; then youFwillsalltnow about it 
Your father will,announce it. When EP como iu: here affain, then you will 
tell him about it. Now tomorrow we shall go ‘back “for my brother has, 
come here with me. Well, that is all. Lam. going Aagk. Uf is almost day- 
light.” oe = 

“Very well,” she answered him. . Sar . 

Thereupon he went out of the tipi. Tle ontegnd his grandmother's 
lodge. We lay down, As soon’as he had Jain dows, his. urrpw off yonder 
lay at rest. They slept. When day broke, early iit torring they went 
back home. Tuwards evening thoy arrived at their vel ig. ' 

“Where have you been?” their wives asked theif. 

“Well, far enough to use up the provisions you-gave.me, and then we 
came home. You gave us two littlé food for the way,” they told them. 

So when the next day came, the younger one drove buffalo, He brought 
many buffalo. On the next day after that be again asked for provisions; 
and they were given much of the very best food. Then early they went out 
of the tent. As soon as they were behind a rise in the land, they flew up. 
It was ag before; in the evening they arrived. They went into their 
grandmother’s lodge. This time at once their grandmother gave them 
bedding. As soon as night had fallen they gave it to their grandmother. 

‘ “Keep these good victuals, grandmother. Karly tomorrow morning 
call the chief’s daughter: she is to come here,” he told his grandmother. — 

Off yonder where they dwelt he was heard through his arrow. 

“So now you are to have a fellow-wife, big sister!” the man’s daughter 
was told. 


‘ 


“You surely do carry on in a dreadful way!” his younger brother said 
to him.+ 
“Tt is you, rather, who go on in 8 dreadful way!” he answered 


ale pet 


44 


They wha heard Uhrough their arrows, aid those girls from time to 


tine eould nel hed laughing, 

then, when daylight tied come, “Now, grandmother, go call that 
venie down) Give her thers; she imay take them home with her, Per- 
ferapaps tls petopeles will be able to live, if they reach their old camp,” ho told 
foe grandioother, ° 

‘hen phe wos onlled for sud invited, 

My gratudchild, you are to come to my tont for a bit. My grand. 
Child has been bothering me toe invite you. Tho rest he will tell you.” 

“Very well,” she sud to her. “ 

Phe went there, When he entered, who was that sitting there, but 
the one who had courted her! Bho sat down by his*side. 
Well, these thingt are why LT have edled you hore. Now, if once 


they camp on the way, thi, will be from where wo others will depart,” he 
7 


told hers “Now then, now let your father announce what 1 have told you, 
rhe things Tanid. “A grent supply of ment has this one’s father-in-law,” he 
noid, referring to his younger Prothers “So there.” 

Accordingly, the young woman went home. She called her father 
fromeher tent . 

“Father, a child has comein here, * * % © % % & mm OF 
Your fellow-old-mnan who was abandoned has a store of meat. ‘As many 
ns are the deserted cunps, to many are the senffolds where hang the meats,’ 
rays your son-indaw; ‘Accordingly, #0 let him announce it,’ he said to me, 
and (hat is why Tam saying it now.” 

“¥en, daughter, And so at last you have that which you begged for, 


ORY TIME, ‘iu yistior,” Try to live uprightly, be sympathetic toward your 
Felloeaeit! he told his daughter. o 
hen he announced it: “We shall move camp today, 3 issheard 


that 'nmn y old friend has a supply of food; it is heard that he:Kas'a supply. 
Without, delay you are to camp there whence you have moved camp,” he 
said; instructing his people. 

__ Accordingly, they all moved camp. There where they camped for the 
night, ogain that one went courting, 2. 0.0... . / . Whey 
arrived at their dwelling. 

Then, a4 soon as he entered, “Sister-in-law, be jealous. of your hus- 
band! That chiefs daughter, her he has taken to wife,” he said of his 
younger brother, ; "Tee, 


_ “Nonsense, brother-in-law, it is you, rather, who ‘hage-takén her to 
wife. J have been listening to you all’the time,” his sister-in-law told him. 
“Now then, children, make ready by clearing the snow from the place 
where your elder sister is 0 stay and your other father; in two places you 
will clear the snow,” he told them. - \ 
Su they moved camp to that place. Without delay they joined them 
where they camped, By this tine the warm weather was coming on. 
Then, “Now, brother, drive in’ some buffalo. But watch for him: 
there is one who hates you. And there is one who hates me; but, as for 
me, 1 shall defeat him,” he told him; “Never walk through the herd 


when you bring buffalo,” he told his younger brother; “Do you first fetch 
buffalo,” he told him. 


“Yes,” the other answered him, 


ATT 


Karly in the morning he set out. He did as before, collecting buffalo 
dung; # bofore, he whooped at them. They rose from the ground, To 
throw himsolf down. Uo camo walking at their head. Tho buffalo pressed 
him close, stopping on his bird-tail, for tho creature which we call the 
quuil, that way the form tho bashful one had taken, The ny when things 


wore waved to drive on tho buffalo, he found no place to goj, hoe hung _ 


helplevs in the air; he wont past the hord. Although ho wanted to como 
to carth, he was not able to. Hastily to a clump of willows, hastily he 
flew up und thithor, All af-once something came bearing/down with noiso 
through the air, He had not time to look that way; if camo and struck 
hin. But it failed to snatch him, In ono place that other creature circled 
round in the sir, a 

‘Then tho prattler cried “Dear me, my brother js being destroyed! I 
must go look after him!” | 

Ho wont ‘out of the tent; he took his bow; and he took those two 
wrrowd. There in tho grove ho saw his brother lying. When ha reached 
him, cloxo by a wintor-hawk was hanging in the air. a 

“Hey!” he called to it; “Hey! Exactly as now you “apnea, “even 80 
shall be your bodily form. eu 
you would always transgress. You. will have to get your fap én 
the way of this which now you have done!” he said to ite oe al yo 

It could not change its form; it could not turn back into htrman shape. 
It was the one of whom the quail who was slain had been told, “He hates 
you.” Now for his brother. He shot an arrow into the air; when he had 
shot the second one as well, his brother rose to, his feet; he had restored 

him to life. 

At once he hurried to the buffalo-pound; he saw a man sitting up on 
the hurdles of the enclosure, He wore a bracelet on his arm. The prattler 
descended to earth and began to look for a flint arrow-head. 

“Oho! I prized it, Glutton, my flint arrow-head!” 

He looked at him; his hand was bloody. Te did like this. 

“Tt must be you, Glutton!” 

As he said go to him, it was 2 magpie that he struck full in the face. 

“Here needs you will beg from human men! You will not be able 

. to change your form! Wipe your face; you will have sight!” he said to it. 

Tt could not change its form. 

“In the woods you will get your sustenance!” he told it. 

When it was told thus, it flew up; it flew somewhere aloft. It was 
unable to take on human form again. 

“Let us needs both go. tomorrow; let us drive buffalo,’ said the 
prattler, “Then let us plan for these people,” he said to his younger brother; 
“Tor it will not go well—mortal men are to be born here on earth, and we- 
must clear this earth for them,” he told his brother. 

“Yes,” tho latter answered him. 

Then both went, the next morning, to drive buffalo. So off yonder- 
they made buffalo; and they brought back with them a vast’ number, but 
only « few went into the corral. ‘Phe Partridge wore breeches of hair, and 
the Quail wore breeches of hair. And they wore their clothes with the fur 
turned in. They looked most handsome. They stood together, the two 
as they slew all the buffalo. While some of the people cleaned the game, 
others came to give them berry-water to drink. 


Zt 


“Now thon, people, you, will have to turn into various forma, As, 


many ad wre the beasts, as such you will fiid your sustonance. [very 
mortal man will overcome you, whon off in the fature he grows forth into 
life. But ax for me, thero in middle spuco TE shall be, whore are throo stars. 
Yorover T shall live, And as for this my younger brother, thoro shall be 
twain stare, and forever shall ny brother live. For our Mather has planned 
that wo shall make way for mortal man to grow forth here on this earth.” 


This is ad for as this sacred story goes. 


_ (34) Hell-Diver 


Mra. Maggie Achenam 
ka-wihkaskusahk. - 


dkwah kutak. u : 
sthkihp nohldh-ayiaiyiniwiw. kdtahtawd usthidw uldsah uskihtdpak- 
wah ubtsih, dhwah ublsahtsdpiyah usthdw, atsusisah’ minah,  dkwah 
tluhldw ndhiydndhk ot ma, ayistyintiwah wapamdw ; ituhtdw, 
“tans émah dh-itishdyan ?¢” 
namnuya niatluhlam dh-dta-kitotikut. 
“ahpuh diukd upwasimuw awah," ttwiwak. 
hw d-hilotiht, pwdsinuwan, nanvuya nisituhtam., 
“ ndlsdh, ” itwdw, 
“ sthkihp da dni 1” itdw. 
tapasin kuntah keGti-naputukanikutethk. 
dkwah kdtahtawd mildtaht ihlastwak: ayisiyiniwak, ndpdwak, dh-mdh- 
milsitsik, piyakh pilew iskwdw kahkiyaw ohih ustésah dh-pamihdt, kdtah- 
tawi mdnah dhentkuhtdt tahtu-kistkaw, tahtu-kisikdw mdtstyiwa ustisah, 
kdtahtawd iskwiwah pdw-ulihtik mdkwals éh-mdtahikdt, dkust wisdmik ta- 
sipwdhlilsik, namuya lapwihtawéw. maskamik kikway ; sipwéhtatayi- 
wah. dkwah pimitisahwdw : wahyaw dh<chtdtstk, miytk, dhkwah sipwdhtd- 
wak ; witsdwaw. dkwah sipty utthtamwak, 
“ dh-ntaw-indpimiyahk, ” itik, “ mikisdyiniw. ”’ 
dkutah ayiwak sipihk. kitahtawd pdtsitsimdyiwah ayistyiniwah dh- 
apisisisiyit. dkwah pé-kapatdwépahamiyiwa utdstyiw.  dydkunik nisu 
posiwak iskwiwak. pdyak nakatahwiw ; dkwah dy6ké mah-mdlow. dkwah 
6kt pimitsimdwak. : 
“minahé,” itdwak. 
mustuswah wapamdwak, dkwah kapatdwépaham utdsi dwako sihkihp. 
minahéw. 
“pila nka-mitsin wisi [" 
“d,namuya ! nama kdkway ! nk-dpatsihtan mad-manitsohkahki. ” 
dkwah awa pdyak iskwdw, “ sihkihp awah,” itwéw. 
kutak awah, *‘ namuya ! mikis-iyiniw.” 
dkwah kawth posiwak dsihk. dkwah kétahtawd kapatéwépaham. 
 6tah apik,”’ ttéw uwikimakanah. 
ékwah apiwak. 
“ dkwah kitsdhkus kd-pd-ntémikuwaw, ” itdw. 


‘ 


1 Probably wrong; the translation is a guess. 


" 


297 


dkwah sipwdhtdy.  hitahtawd kd-pdladatamuhtit: ntau uskinikiek- 

wiwak, . ot \ 
- | datam, nitsdhkads tf | 

wipisk-ataimu-mayisah lapthtdpladwak,  dkwah ituhtdwuk, — takuht- 
dwak ndtd. , 

dkwah naha kutale kd-nakatahut lakusin dkuta; kautakah napdwah 
miskamdsiw, dkwah ah-lipiskak nimihitowak, . 

dkwah, “ kaya paspapik ka-wih-nimihituhk, " tldw wiwah awah sthkihp. 

dkwah ahtst niko paapaptwak dydkunik iskwdwak, pot Gmah sihkihnah 
nah-napwdkiskadmawah,\ undpdmiuiwah sthkihpah. dkwah iskudw awa 
pakwatdw sihkihpah t-6ndpdmil. sipwihldwak ; kutakah ntaw-undpdmiwak, 
ulindwak mistikwah dh-yoskisiytt, manitsdsah dhemihtsdtiyit;  kawisi- 
munahdwak unipdwiniwahk., dkwak dhusi sipwdhldwak. 

dkwah ethkthp dh-piydwihk kimdw. kawistmutulawdw piyak woiki- 
mdkanah. 

“ nitsdh-lsistinih.—ldnd k-dh-tsdh-tatstiniyan ? kiydm, dh-kth-md-manit- 
sohkahk.—mahti kutak. ” ; . 

_ kutakah minah tedh-tsistinik. 

“Kkahkiyaw dkwah kitsistindwaw, pikuh dh-kih-nimihituhk,"' itaw. 

kdkway iah: “ kayds émah nitaw-indpdmiwak ; dh-tah-tahkwamiskik 
antkih manttsésak ; mistikwak aniki kd-kawistmututawatsik, ” 

dkwah mdatiw sthkihp. ntunawiw dkwah. miskawdw kutakah napdwah 
dh-wikimadyit. kisktkwidswdw ndpdwah ; nipahdw. kdtahtawd iskwdwak 
pdkupayiwak ; ndpdwah Ghi nipahimdwah, sipwéhtdwak. 


” 


oy 


Now another story. ; 
Hell-Diver wanted to be a mun. Once upon a time he made some 
breeches for himself out of ecdar bark. Also he made himself a bow and 
_ arrows. Then he went to this Cree country here. He saw people; he 
went there. © 
“What are you after here?” 
He did not understand when they spoke to him. 
“Maybe he is a Stony Sioux,” they said. 
But when they spoke Sioux to him, he did not understand. 
“Shay chah,” he said. -—— 2 84: 
“Why, it’s the diver-duck!”’ they Said of him. 
He fled, waddling off in no particular directién. 
. Now, once there were ten people, men, who spent their time hunting, 
'., and one woman took care of all these men, who were hér elder brothers. 
Then, at one time—while she gathered firewood every day, her brothers 
went on their daily hunt. . Then, at one tine some women came to where 
she was tanning: These women asked her‘tle go away with them. She did 
cae not ‘listen to them. ‘he others took sumething away from her; they 
went off with it. Then she pursued them; when they had gone a long 
° ways, the others’ gave. it, back, to.Her. Then they went from there; she 
accompanied the others. Then they-¢ame to a-river. 
* . “It’s a husband we're going after,” -the others told her, “the Bead- 
Man.” are _— 
There by the river they stayed. Presently a little man came in a 
canoe. He beached his canoe where they. were. Those two women got 


eae 


298 


into the canoe. The other one was left behind as- they paddled off; she 
wopt and wept. And the others paddled along. 


‘Kill some game,” they told him. 


They saw some buffaloes. Then that hell-diver beached his canoe. 
He killed-one, 7 


“Pirst let 2 me eat the bolly-fat!” 
“Oh dear, no! I should 1 say not! I am going to use it when religious 


rites are performed.” Cc 
Then that one woman said, “He is the diver-duck.” |. 
The other, “No! The Bead- Man,” D 
Then they got into the canoe again. In due time‘he beached i i 


“Stay here,” he told his wives. 

So they stayed. . 

“Your sister-in-law will come call you,” he told them. ~~ 

Then he went. In due time someone came: two young women. 

“Come, sister-in-law!" 

rn » . «. . . Then they went ‘there. 

They arrived over there, 
Then that other woman who had been left by the canoers arrived 


there; she found another man for herself, Then, when night came they 
danced. . 


Then, “Don’t peep in 1 where the dance i is going on,” that hell-diver 
told his wives. 


But those women peeped i in just the same. There was the hell-diver 
being trampled on, their husband, the hell-diver. Then that one woman 
hated having the hell- diver as her "husband. They went away; they went 
to take another husband. They took a crumbly old log that had many 
bugs on it; they placed it like someone lying down in their bed. Then 
they went away. 


When the dance waa over, the hell-diver came home. 


. & . 


The other one, also, kept pinching him. 


“Now both of you pinch me, even though there has been a dance,”’ he 
said to them. 


Something there spoke: “Long ago by. this time they have gone to 
find a husband; it’s bugs are biting you there; we 


Then the hell-diver wept. Then he looked for them. He found them : 
staying with another man. He cut the other man’s throat; he killed him. : 
Suddenly the women woke up; that man had been killed. They ¥ went ‘ 
away from there. 


299 ; ’ 
-(32) Hell-Diver 


Coming-Day 
ka-kistkdw-pthtukdw. 


Kitahtawd pdyak kisdyintw, dkwah pdyak notukdsiw, dkwah vis dskini- 
kiskwdwak ulawdsimisiwawa awa kisdyiniw. kitahtawd Ghkusiw awa kisdy- 
intw; piyis nipiw. dkwah awa piku notukdstw, dkwah uldnisah nisu, 
nistuwak. dkutah ay-aydwak. piyish kinwds aydwak. kitahtawd mina 
Ghkusiw awa notukisiw ; piytsk kinwis Ghkusiw, dkwah wih-nipiw, 

Gmis twdw: “ nitawasimisitik, sipwahtihkek ;  kakwd-miskawdhkdk 
awiyak. kispin miskawaydleu nipdw, undpdmihkdk ," itdw; “ mdaskGts 
dkutah uhisth dkd wih-nipahdhkatuséydk. ” 

“ Gha’ ,” itwiwak 6k oskinikiskhwdwal. 

_ Ehusi kiyipah namuya pimdtisiw awa nédtukdsiw. 

dkwah uskinthishwdwak Omis ttwiwak : “ Omist kkih-tikunaw kikdwi- 

yinaw: ‘ sipwahtihkak, nipiydni,’ kih-itwiw kikdwiyinaw,’? itwiw aw 
Omisimaw. ; 

“ldpwd wapahki ka-sipwihtdndnaw, ” itwiwak. 

 tépwd dh-wipaniyik, sipwihtdwak. kahkiyaw nakatamwak utsay- 
Gnisiwawa. piyisk niswéw dh-nipdisik, stpiy uhtamwak. minisah milt- ~ 
sdlintyiwa. kwah nohtéhkaliwak., dkutah minisah mawiséwak; éwakuni 
dh-mitsitsik. ' 

. Omis itwdw aw dmisimadw: “haw, nisimis, adké wiya stpwihtilin. 
_ dwakunih ka-mah-midtsiyahk minisah nakatamahku, ka-nohtéhkalanénaw, "' 
itéw usimisah. - 
. tapwd akutah aydwak. niyohtdyapakwdtwawi, ituhtiwak nipihk, . 
sipihk dheminihkwatstk. ‘piyisk kinwdsk dkutah ayawak. 
Kitahtawd kinwisk dkut dh-aydtsik, ah-ntawi-minihkwdtstk sipihk, 
kuniah mdtawdwak dkutah, asinisah éh-pih-pakastawdéwdpindtsk, 
_kuntah d&h-mdtawdtstk. Kitahtawd kd-wipamdtsik awiya ‘natimihk dh-pd- 
“méihipwiwdytt, osthk dh-pimiskayit. 
“nimisd, awina néha?” stwdw aw usimimdw. 
ch-itapit aw bmisimaw, “hd, nisim, miyaimay ndpaw !” iwiw aw 
Smisimadw ; “nisimis, ‘ nipdw wapamayakt, wikimahky ik, mdskols akd 
wah mipenGhkattercndkia' kikthattkunaw kikdwiyinaw," dw dsima. 
pryisk kisiwak dh-pd-thidytt, kd-nisitawdyimdtsik ndpawa. 
Omis itwiw aw umisimadw: “dstam { pd-ndtahundn; ahpoh ka- 
wikimttindn, ” itdw aw dmisimaw. . 
tapiskots Gkd-dh-péhtahk awa sthkihp ds awa, dkulé iskwawah k- 
dyayit isi sthkow, kd-wapamaisik mikisah dh-sihkoyit. 
nya, misimis, dkw ds Gwa mikisiyiniw 1” itéwak. 
kitahtawd, “ makisiyiniw 1” ttdw. 7 ; 
émis tiwéw sihkihp, tapiskots dkwaydk dh~pdhtahk, “mah ! tdnis 
dlwdydk ?” _ 
“ dstam, mikisiyiniw ! pih-ndtahunan. ahpoh ka-wikimitindn, dh- 
itwayahk. ” 
“ Gha’ , tsdskwah 1” itwaéw awa sthkihp. oo 
Gkutd ist kapéw. miyusiyiwa oh Sskinthiskwdwa. dkwah pésihdw, 
pisistk d-sithkut, mikisah mana nipihk ah-pohkisiniyit: dkusi kiwdhtahdw. 
kitahtawd ka-wapamatsik mustuswah, 
‘nah, ka-minahohéma |! éh-nohtahkatayahk oma t”? thodyiwa. 
“aha, cha’ , niwitik | nika-minahun ; ‘ka-mitsisundwdy.’ 


’ 


; oO ve : 
/ ; . ; van 
FO ; : ‘ . * 300 


Se, fikwah dh-kapdt, “haw, niwitik, kanawdyihtamuk oma kitdsinaw, ” 
udw. 
 tapwd ati-sipwéhtew, d-wih-minahut. dh-kitapamdatsiki dk Sskinikisk- 

-wiiwak, tapwd paskiswdjytwa ; pdyak nipahdyiwa. miywaythtamuk. 

“ Gkwah ka-milsisuyahk | knohtdhkatahtanaw, nisimis 1!” itwdw awa 
umisimaw. ~ . 

lanpwi Gh-pd-sikdwdt awa sthkihp, “ aiwitil, “Kika-milsisundwa ; ; 
niminahun, ”’ itdw. 

dkust sakahpitamule am: 68, Gh-timatsiwdteik, wépamdwak mistusivah 
utah Gh-pimisiniyit, 

éh-takuhldtstk, “haw, newitik, kakwayahul mihtah dh-utinamdk. 


, 


nik-dspihtsi-wiyanihtakan, ta-kutawé yd, ta-nuh-nawatsiyak, kinohtdhkat- , 


Ghiawaw 1" itdw. 

lipwd kiyipiwak Gh-kutawdterk, : 

“ nipapadsiyihian, niwittk. otdh omah dh-wikihk, riistah d~wih-miya- 
watikwahk, d-wih-nimihituhk, nipdhikawindtukd, aka mayaw d-ntawi- 
takusiniyan, ” Gtaw 

Ghwah oki uskinikiskwdwak h-atinahkik mihtah, “nd, nisimis, kaht-. 

’ sindh awa dh-kihtsdythtakusit kindpiminaw 1" itdw. 

“nah 1” itwiw awa usimimaw; “ nimisd, niya wiya’ dh-itdyimak, 
_ lapiskols dh-méhis6wit | usém ma-mohtsitundmow: ’ 

; 7“ nl pasinaw tsi nlawdyimadw id dtr hitowiht ? dwakw dwa 
nye mikisiyiniw. ”’ 

“ namuya; hot -usimimdw + niwapamdw ane kiméts mina ah- 
ulinat mikisisah, dh-saskamut. dkutah mana, ‘nikitepamibwak,'-dldyih > 
_tahkth, kd-sihkcul, mikisah manu kd-sthkwdtdt, namuy dn dwako,” itdw, 

mar mikisiyiniw, ” ttwdw aw dsimimaw. 
° . dkusi. dkwah dkwah d-rutawitetk,. kdleats Krei-aviyanihitw awa sihkihp. 
° ahaa t-kutawdteik, ituhtdwak.’ 

dkwah, “ ahaw, Mawitih, itah whemiyposik wiyds utinamuk, ta-nawat- 
. lyk,” itd. 

lapwi skwiiwak 6ki utinamwak: wits, dkuyikuhk. ha-pakutedinat awa, 

wapahlam awa usimiméw wiyin. - ; 
“nd, wisi niya nik-dydn, t-uspahteikeyan 1” ttwdw. - * 


« yohs 1” ttwdw awa sihkihp, “kdkway mile Jeiysolakukpiyan oma- ; 


k G-wih-mah-mantsokahk 7” atwdw. 

umisimenn awa,  niya wiya wikwah nka-manaspahtsikanan 1” tiwdw, 

“ yaw, kdkway’ mutkes kiy-bwikuhkdyan ?” itwdw. 
' nisuwdls utastuliniyiw wisi. ~ 

" yoho, kdkway maka kiy-dtastultiniydn oma Kacuih-md-manteakath ?” 
itudw awa sthkihp. 

dkuh oki uskinikiskwiwak omisih ibwilw ab usimimito : “ nimistl, 
kihtein Gwa dhemohtsowit {” itwdw. 

“ “nish ! dh-ukimawit awa, k-ch-ntumiht itd ninitaw s-wi-isiotariht ” 


‘a, piyakuh-kihtedyimdw awa’! dh-mohtsdwit niya wiya nitdyimaw 1". 


“ chay dhusisi 1 kika-pohtap,” itdw usima. 
dhuyikuhk :kisitapuwak. 
“ yd-milsisw dkwa 1” at wh-itileut, tapiskote aka th-pahtawat. 
“ na, kiy’éma k-dutan, mikisiyiniw {” 2 
4 ha. J dkuyikuhk, 1” itd sihkihp. : 
s ‘ pd-mitsisu dkwah 1” ; Be rs 
lapwh niawih-mitsisdw. ‘ a so ; 


Ky 


i 
' 


| © 801 


_ “Gah, niwitth, hakwdyahuk ‘ah-milwisuyah, mistah dituk bma notarihtd 
» en, Om itd k-6h-ntumtkawiydn, ka-with-nimihituhk, ” 
‘tépwd kiyipa kisi-mitsiséwak. d-kisi-mitsisutsik, dkwah posihtawak 
wiyasah, d-sipwahtatstk, | Mitahtawa -Gh-atiy-utaki iniytk, dkutah uma 
mana, ‘ éma. i oe ka-nimihituhk, ” h-dtwdt ; aka nam Gwiya wipam- 


fog 
470+ 


mawatsihituh mana. ka-mwdsiskamahténaw 1” itdw; “Gta wiya uhisita 
7 piku ta-pihikawtyan, . Kispin aka utah dyaydni, n muya molsikthtawak, ” 
. dw . 


ak. . 
“aha hehe!” ‘thoi awa, _sthkihp'; - ai dlsik dni dtukd kd- 


oe ‘wikih, ah-ihtateik, kapa-sakdwayit ayisiyiniwah, 
nd “th padyak ka-pd-sakawil I” -itwdyiwa. 
a “na dkutah dtuk oma! kdy-itahk kindpamina ! dkwah kd-miywdyth-. 
tamahk, ‘wapamayahkwawi ayisiyiniwak, ’” itdw usima aw iskwdw. 
Gmis itwiyiwa: ‘ héhwah, takusin sthkihp |” ka-matwéh-twdwiht. 
potih mihtsdt pa-sdhdwayiwa iskwéwa.- 
“ ndéh, sthkithp pétahiskwiéwdw |" itdw St 
“yah, ‘niwitik, nuhé anth k-dtatsike, ‘ sihkihp, ' K-éitwdtsik,” itéw. 
* sthkthp, pé-kapa [?. 
_Ghtsi pikuh pimitsimaw, 
kitahtawd ka-pahtahkik ck iskwiwak, “ biqdpdmaude, L sthkikp { 
“mikistyiniw, ” itihk 17. | 


“ mikisiyiniw piituhiskwdwiw !—pé-kapa ! ” -- ‘— 
° “hah, niyé k- ~itihawiyan, niwttik 1" itaw, ch-hapat. et, 
“ mistaht kikaskiyihtamihtasun;: kd mayaw ah-takusiniyin. akus dni 


oe Sesh 


——-—~Gkwah ki-nimihituhk,” itimdwa unipémiwawa. 
Kitahtawd” ka-pd-takuhtiyit nisu uskinikiskudwah, usima, sihkikp, 
“ hddy 1 k-dtwéyit ; “ kitsGhkusinawak dh-pdsthtsik | f dh-itwdyit. 

° | Gh-itaitstk, awin ahi; kih-tsdh-tsipikutsdsiyiwa, ah-vapiltadpisoyit 
atimu-mdya dh-pdstdyik. dkusi witsshkamawdwak, tewiydstmawdua ‘dh- 
tahkuhtatsiwihtatéwiht uwiydsimiwawa. 

* dkust an dkwa-kd-manukahk itah ka-wih-namihituhk, ” K-ttwaéwiht, 
dkusi wiyawaw mina'manukdwak ok oskintkiskwawak, sihkikp awa wiwa, 
é-kisi-mdnukdwiht wikiwaw, dkwah ch-mitsisulsik, Gsay kd-pd-ntumiht, 

“ sthkihp, dkwah kintumikawin,”' itdw. 
‘tapiskots aha ah-paltahk. _dkusi kiwdyiwa ka-pd-ntumikut. piyisk 
* Rolawe-pahaw. | fe 
“6, tansi dtat, aka: mayaw ka-pd-tuhtat sthkihp ?” 
ae kipah dkwah kintumikawin, “ntitaw” 


ee yahehes indpamawate a dtukd ! ‘ mikisiyiniw, kinitumik kilsi-mikisty- 
mw, maw-atihk, * 


“ aha’, ' | 
“ makisiyiniw py . 
. bee wih Lb” - _ 
ae kipah dkwah ta-pictubla, kitik kitst-mikisiyiniw.” . 
“ aha’ ,” itudw awa sthkihp.> 
“ haw, ’ niwitik, pdlak d-misdk wiydkan. mistah dni mana nitasamika- 


win itah, ah-miywasik Kisitdw. ” 


ied the record here and below; the usual form ia ndpdwimdw : “he shames him by 
apeech. . 
83186—20 


302 ° 
dkwah wawdyiw. ‘ 
“hah, unihtsim, pdlah wisth 17 , - 
miydw. dyakw akwanahiw. wtyin dkwah pakwahtéhiw. 
 pdtah anima wiyinuh!” | . 
2 tisinamawdw, dkwah dwakunih éh-pah-pimuyit adyitaw. dkwah mina 
. ulastutiniw, wisi, d-pustastulindt. ‘ 
dkusi ékwah é-wih-ati-wayawit, “ ahadw, niwitik, dkadya pd-ntawdpah- 
kik méyakwam, misawdts nka-pétén ta-mitsiyék pdtunawén,” itéw wiwa ; 
“Gka wiya wiya pé-ntawapahkak. misawdts .nka-kiskdythtén, péy-ituh-- 
tdyiku, ” ttéw. V4 , 
akus dspin éh-ituhtdt. 
pahkdtsil, - : . 
mis ttwiw aw dsimimaw : “ nimisd, nama tsiw dyad Gh-piwdyihtakusit ? 
dh-mohts6wit miydmay 1” Tr 
“ndh 1” itwéw aw dmisimaw ; “ pasinadw tsi mistahi ntawayihtakusiw, 
oma ndntaw k-dsistdwiht ? ch-ukimawit dtukw 6yd 1!” itwéw;.aw omisimaw. 
“namuya !” itwiw aw usimimaw ; “ ukimawit ana, namuy@ tah- 
akwanahéw wisth, ” . 
“nah, tahki pikw dwa éh-piwdyimdt !” itéw usima. 
“ tsikdmoé nama nipiwdéyimaw, d-ma-mohtsowit |” itéw. 
kitahtawa ké-péhtahk dh-matwd-sékowéwiht, é-nimihitowtht. 
“ nimisd, nka-nlawapahkan |” 
“Gka wiya !"" itdw ustma; “ka-kisiwahadnaw. ch-manitéwit dtukw 
ana k-oh-kihtséyihtakusit. ” 7 
“ nasinaw tsi-kihtsdyihtakusit, wiyinwa akwanahéw ?” itéw. 
“ tahki pikw awa dh-piwdyimat !” 
“nah, kiya maka piku ké-kihtsdyimat wiya mohtsoyiniwit ! kiyam 
nka-ntawdpahkdan, nimisd. ” . 
“aha. atsiya piké. matsikatitan kd-totdkuyahk, wadpamiskih 1” 
“itép namuya nka-kakwi-wdpamik. ” 
lapud ntawapahkéw. dh-paspapit, kd-wdpamat ohih unapdmiwawa 
Gh-tah-tahkiskimiht, “ sihkihp ayétotsikdniwiw 1” Gh-itwéwtht, ustikwan- 
istyiw piku d-sadkamoyik, asiskiy misiwd ch-aydyik, 6ma wiyin k-dkwana- 
huyit mitund d-mdstiskamuht. wawie dkwah piwdyimdaw, . 
kd-wépamdt awa sihkihp uwikimadkana d-paspapiyit, kd-pasikusipahtat 
awa asthkihp, notukdsiwa dkutah dh-apiyit, dékunih dh-tah-tahkiskawat 
awa sihkihp, “ sihkihp dyétotsikaniwiw 1” Gh-itwat, “ndah, kitimahéw 
sihkihp nétukdsiwah !” éh-itwdwiht, 
kiwdpahtaw aw uskinikiskwéw. ; 
omis Uwiw : “ nimisd, mistah ds aya ch-piwiyiniwit kindpdéminaw ka- 
Rihbsdyimat ! kiydm sipwéhlétin ! niya wiya nipakwatd mohisowit, ”’ 
itdw. - 


mihidtamwak 6k iskwdéwak, d-kih-nohtah-kita- 


“nd, Gh-manitowit dtukw Gna ! ka-nipahikunaw ana 1 

“ pasinaw ts tah-tahkiskawdw manitéwit anah ? namuya dksi tah- 
totawdw. dh-méhtséwit anah, k-6h-mitawakéhk, ” -ttéw, 

“ tansi maka té-totamahk ? ” » 

“ mistikwak nisu nk-6tindwak,”’ itwdw aw astmimaw. ' 

“ Ghw’ ,” itéw. 4 


if correctly ‘recorded, for wiyinwah : (plural) “pieces of fat méat,” but the-particle 
anima: “that’' is singular number. . 4 


wea 7 


t. “kiya kdékuts,; usimimaw !” 


aka h-waniskgytt, wiya waniskaw. 6h dsimimadwa dh-pdskiwdpindt, 
- kahkiyaw dméwah uhpiydyiwa, éGh-mamawohkakut, pikw ttah ch-tahkwami- 


3803 


lapwd ndtédw hi ‘mistikwah, dh-tskusitstk, 7 iytkuhk ah-iskusihal ohi 


mistikwah. itah éh-pimisihk aw uskintkiskwaw, dkutah ahdw ohi mistikwah. 

“haw, haméwak dtah ka-mihtsdtiwak !—paskinikuydkuh 6yé sihkihp, 
mamawohkawahkak, ka-notindyék ! ékust !—ékwah kiya !” itéw umisak. 

dkutah mina ahéw mistikwah, éh-akwanahdt. « 

“ haw, étah ta-mthtsdtiwak mantésak !” itéw. 

dkus ch-tsi-akwanahdat, “ wih-kawisimutsth étah, tahkwamahkak, mant- 
sositik !” ttéw. 

“ha, nyd, nimisad ! tapasitan !” ttéw. 

tapasiwak. 


” Gkwah iyikuhk kakats éh-wapaniyik, po jowan, dkwah Ghekewat sthkikp. . 


tapwa pdtaw om itah céh-miywdsiniytk wihkohtowin. 
‘6m itah, niwitik, pdtunawan !” 
namuya kitutik. 
“ watstakats okt hd-posahkwamitsik L” itwaw., ; 
dkuse nahastaw, dkwah: éh-nahapit,. Gh-kétayowinisdt, d-wth-kawisimut. 
6h Omisimawa kawisimututawdw. mayaw gh-kisi-akwanahut, sémak tahk- 


; wamik mantisah. 


‘ya, dka wiyah, umthtsim | kiyam éma kih-md-mantsbkaniwiw, ” itéw, 


ahkist det “ Gh-nimthitéwiht, dh-witsihiwiwak !” &h~itéyihtahk, uwikim- 


akanah. 

tahkih éh-tahkwamikut mantsdsah, piyis wanskaw. ° ° 

“ walstakah ké-kahkwéythtaskit, } 1)" ataw ; ; “maht dsimim !” itwdw, 
Gkutéh mina éh-kawisimut. » 


say mina dmowah tah-tahkwamik, 
“Gkad wiya, usimim ! niwth-nipdn js nindstusin, dytkuhk éh-nimth- 


; ituyan’ !” ta-kih-nastusit, dh-kih-tah-tahkiskaht mitunth ! 


~~~" namuy  dtstk anih ta-kih-nahi-witsihiwdyan itah  dh-nimihituhk, 
tytkuhk ka-kéhkwéythtaskiyék [” ttwéw. - 
nisawats Stah kunt tah kawisimow. dyikuhk ‘Gh-akwa- asikayik; 
dkuytkwhk pékupayiw. ah-éhpiskwdyit, kéydpits nipayiwa uwikimakana. 
“ waniskah, umthisim ! akwa-kisikéw 1” ttwaw. 
namuya waniskayiwa. 


a 


kut, piyis mistwé uhkwakanthk, mina usitihk uht mantsésah éh-tah-tahk- 
wamikut. piyisk wayauiyamow, apisis dh-téhkapit, dméwah ch-totakut. 

6misi.itaw, mistah dh-padhtékusit wikihk : “ nama tsi wiyah Gh-nipahat 
uwtkimakanah ?” itéw ; “ mahtih |” ch-itwdwiht. © 

wiyah nipthk ituhtéw sipthk, Gh-Kth-utinahk mihkuh. dkust pésiw, ah- 
ati-nikamut. 

“nama tsi wiya Gh-nipahat uwtkimakanah, é-wih-nipahisut ? ” itaw. 

méhkumdn ah-ttinahk, “ dy, wih-tahkamiséw !” ttaw. 

tdpwd tahkahtam 6ma mihkuh, kuntah d-sikipayiytk mihkuh, “ nipah- 
ts6w 1” Gh-itiht. 

Gkust kwatapiw, dkuté sipd ah-pimih-mitsimtt osthk, 

| “&, nipahiséw sihkihp { kwataprw i” 
dkus d-sipwdyahukut. 
83186—20 


“=. them, the old woman and her ‘two daughters. 


304 3 
“tdpwd Meindtsihdw uwikimdkanah | kakwd-utinthk 1" itwdwéni, 
bsihk dh-ndtahuht. - 
utésth dma utinamwdn’; namuya dkutah aydw, éh-kokit. 
- “tapw ds dnt dh-nipahisut 1" itaw. ; 
= wahyaw dkuld kapdw, kutak d-sdkahikanisiwiyik dkuldh dh-ituhtdt. 
‘kitahtawd dkuta-kd-matwd-rikamut, “ ds dni d-kakwd-tsisihtkuyahk sihkihp | 
6tdh matwd-nikaméw |: ntsawats pahkupdk ; miskawdydku, nipahdhkak 
kd-kisindtsthat wiwah' 1" Gheitiht. - -_ 
dkwah mistwd dh-ntunaht nipihk, piyisk kdkway miskuskahkwdwih, 
. Kitahtawd dh-tah-tahkiskahkik, kitahtawd tapiskite dh-matwéwdyik dh- 
“wihtahkik, “ ukdwiyah ds bhi dh-pdskataydskdmiht ; dkusi kinipahanaw |” 
dh-twayit oh ayisiyiniwah, . . . 
_ ponthik, le? 
ha, dkuyikuhk dskwdk dtayshkdwin, 


Once upon a time there was an old man, and an.old woman, and two 
. young women, the children of that old man ahd his wife: Then at one 
time the old ‘man fell sick; at‘last he died. Thén there were only three of - 
They stayed in the sdme 
place. They dwelt there, in the end, for a longitime. .Then, in time, the 
old woman, too, fell ill; in the end, she was sick » long while. Then she 
was about to die. | Ss ee 

She spoke thus: “My children, go away-frdm here; try to find some 
people. If you find a man, marry him,” she tol them; “Perllaps in this 
. way you will not starvé to death.” ' , , fo 
“Yes,” said the young women. 

Thereupon soon the old woman lived no mote. - . 

Then the young women spoke thus: “Our mdther said this to us: {Go 
away from here when I die,’ said our mother,” spoke the elder sister. 

“And so tomorrow we shall go,’”’ they said. ’ _ 

Accordingly, on the morrow they set out. They left behind all their 
posscasions. At last, when they had slept twice on the way, they came to 
a river. There were many berries, And they were hungry. There they 
. gathered berries and ate them. tes 

Thus spoke the elder sister: “Now, sister, let ud not go away from here. 
If we leave these berrics which we are cating, we shall starve,” she said 
' to her younger sister. 


Accordingly, they stayed there. Whenever they were thirsty, they 
went to the water and drank from the stream. In the end they stayed 
. there a long time. | Co . 

Then at one time, when they had been there for quite a while, as 
they went to the river to drink, they played about there, casting pebbles 
into the water, to amuse themselves. Presently they saw someone coming 
downstream, paddling a cance, , 

“Sister, who is that?” cried the younger one. 

_, When the elder, sister looked over there, “Why, sister, surely, a man!” 

- said the elder sister; “Little sister, ‘If you s¢e a man, marry him, and 
perhaps you will not starve tu death,’ our mother said to us,” she told her 
younger sister. —* ~ 


x 


N 


f 


1 at? 


305 


At last, when he had come near, they knew him for a man, ; 
The elder sister called, “Come here! Come fetch us in your canoe; 
if you like, we will marry you,” she called to him. : 

Ioxactly as if he did not hear it that Hell-Diver acted, for he it must 
have been. He spat in the direction of the women, and they saw that he 
spat wampum-beads. | 

“Goodness, little sister, this must be the Wampum-Man!’’ said one 
to the other. 

Presently, ‘“Wampum-Man!” she called to him, 

Thus spoke Hell-Diver, as though only now he heard, ‘‘Why! What 
is that you say?” 

——“Come here, Wampum-Man! Come fetch us in_your canoe. if you 
like, we will marry you, is what we said.” 

“Yes, just a moment!” said Hell-Diver. 

He Janded there. Those young women were handsome. So he took 
them on board, spitting all the time, and each time wampum-beads fell 
into thé water. 'So he started to take them home, Presently they saw 
some buffalo. 

‘Goodness, you ought to take this chance to kill something! The 
fact is, we are hungry!” they said. 

' “Yes, yes, my wives! I shall kiJl some; you shal! eat.” 
Then, when he went ashore, “Now, wives, do you keep watch over 


_ our bout here, ” he told them. 


med 
rae 


_ Bo he went off to kill game. As ‘those young women observed him, 
he shot at the animals; he killed one. They were glad. 
ide “So now we shall eat! We surely were hungry, little sister!” said the | 
elder, 
And 80, when that Hell-Diver came back down the bank, “Wives, you 
shall cat; T have killed some game,” he told them. 
Ac wordingly, they tied fast the canoe and climbed up the bank. They 
saw the buffalo lying there. 
When they got there, “Now then, wives, work as fast as you can, 
gathering fuggots. In the meantime I shall skin it and cut it up, 80 that 


' -you.can mate the fire and do the roasting. You said you were hungry!’ 
he told ther 


_ bo they ere quick about making the fire. 
<x “I am in a hurry, wives. Over yonder in the camp there is going to _ 
be a big celebration and a dance, so they must be waiting for me, seeing 
that I am not getting back in time,” he told them. 

“Then, as the young women were picking up sticks, “Goodness, little 
sister, surely our husband is an important man!” she gaid to her. 

- “Pshaw!’’ answered the younger one; “Sister, as for me, he seems to 
me just as if he were crazy! He talks too silly.” 

“Why, do -you suppose he would be in demand, then, for a dance? 
Certainly, he.is the Wampum-Man.” 

“No,” said the younger one; “I saw the creature taking beads, on 
the sly, and sticking them into his mouth. Then, whenever he thinks we 
are looking at him, he spits, and that is the way he always spits out beads. 
He is no Wampum-Man, not he,” said the younger sister. 


a 


. 306 ) 


So then, when they made’ the fire, Hell-Diver had almost finished 
‘ preparing the carcass. Whey they had built the fire, they went to where 
he was, 

Then, “Now, wives, take the best. parts of the meat to roast, ” he 
told them. “ 

Accordingly, the women took the meat. When hethad opened the 
belly, there the younger sister saw some fat. ; 

“Ooh, me, let me have the belly-fat, to eat with my meat!’ she cried. 

‘“Hoho!” ‘cried Hell- Diver, ‘And what am I then to have for my 
blanket-robe at the Spirit Dance?” he said. 

The elder sister cried, ‘‘And I, I shall take-the kidney-fat to eat as a 
titbit with my meat!” 

“Oho, and what I am I to do for kidney-fat? he cried. 


His headgear, for want of better, was belly-fat. 
“Hoho, and what would I have for my head-dress at the Spirit Dance?” 
cried Hell-Diver. 
. Then of those young women, the younger said, ‘Sister, certainly he 
is crazy!” 
‘Nonsense! Because he is a chieftain is why he is called wherever 
there is to be a ceremony of any kind.” = 
“Fee, this person is alone in looking up to him! As for me, I think he 
is crazy !’’ 
“Don’t. He will hear you,” she told her younger-sister. 
-By this tiffe they had finished their cooking. 
h Although they called to him, “Come eat!” it was just as if fhe had not 
earc 
“Dear me, it is you I am calling, Wampum-Man!”’ 
“Hah! At last!? Hell-Diver answered her, 
“Come and cat now!” 
So he went to eat. 
“Now wives, cat in a hurry. I am delaying pretty badly with all 
this, seeing that I am being called over there for the dance.” — 


And so they quickly finished their meal. When they had done eating, 
they put their meat on board the canoe, and went on. Presently, as 
it was going towards evening, every little ways he would say, “Just at 
that next point is the dance;” but they saw no one. 

“Well, well, well!” said Hell-Diver; “It surely does seem that they 
have taken # far-off place for the council. We might miss the whole 
thing!” he told them; ‘‘Only, of course, they will be sure to wait for me, 
secing that if I am ‘not there, they never have any sport,” he told them. 

When they had got néar, someone came into view. 

“Over there is someone coming into view!” cried one. 

“Dear me, I suppose this.is the place our husband meant! Now we 
shall be glad, when we see some people,” the woman said to her younger 
sister. 

They heard that person cry, “Yoho, Hell-Diver has come!” 


Then a great many women came into view. 
thi “Goodness me, Hell-Diver is bringing women in.his canoe!’’ was said 
‘of him, 
“Yes, wives, it is that person over yonder they mean, when they say 
‘Hell- Diver,’ ” he told them, 


307 


‘"Hell-Diver, come, land!” 
‘He kept right « on paddling. 
Presently those wives heard, “You are embarrassing Hell-Diver by 
the way you address him! Call him ‘Wampum-Men!’” 
‘“‘Wampum-Man is bringing women in his canoe!—Come to shore!” 
“Ha, it ig to me they are talking, wives!” he told them, and went to 
the bank. 
“You deprived yourself of much pleasure, coming late. The dancing 
has gone on without you,” their husband was told. 
Presently there came two young women, Hell-Diver’s sisters, and, 
“Hey l%, they said; “Sisters‘in-law have been brought to us!” 
WE en they looked there, why, they were sharp-nosed little things, 
* So then they were aided in the task of carrying their 
meat up the high bank of the stream. 
‘They are putting up the tipis by the dancing-place,” the people 
said; so those- young women, too, Hell-Diver’s wives, set up their tent. 
When their tent wag set up, ‘and they were eating, already he was sum-~- 


ed. - ; 
“Hell-Diver, you are being called,’”’ he was told. 
It was just as if he had not heard. Soon the one who had come to 
call him went back. At last they grew impatient waiting for him. 
“Hoho, what did you Bay to Hell-Diver, that he is so long about 
coming?” 
“You are summoned to'come at once,’ I said to him.” 
“Aha, no doubt you embarrassed him with your speech! ‘Wampum- 
Man, your fellow-Wampum-Man summons you,’ go say to him.” 
“Very well.” 
“Wampum-Man!” 1 
* What is it?” 
“ ‘He is to come right away,’ your fellow-Wampum-Man says to you,” 
“Very well,” said Hell-Diver. 
“Now then, wives, bring a big dish. You see, I am always given a 
big sharé of the best hot food.” 


Then he put on his finery. f 

“Here, Ainée, bring the helly-fat!” ‘s 

She gave it to him. This then he wrapped round himself as a robe. 
And a piece of fatty meat he used for a belt. - h 


“Bring. that fat!’ 

She handed it to him, and this hé twisted round him at both sides. 
Then he put on his head- dress; belly-fat he wore as his head-dress, 

So then, as he was about to go out of the lodge, “Now, my wives, be 
sure not to come and look on, Have no fear, I shall bring you some of 
the ceremonial food to eat,” he told his wives; “Be sure, however, not to 
come and look on. I shail know it’ without fail, if you come there,’ he - 
told them. 

So off he went. Those women were disappointed, for they were eager 
to look on. 

Then the younger one said: “Sister, cannot it be that that person 
who has just gone is held in contempt? It surely seems that he is crazy!” 

“Nonsense!” gaid the elder sister; “In that case, could it be that he 
ig so greatly in demand at whatever ceremony his people are having? No 
doubt that man is a chief!” said the elder sister. 


™~" 


308 


“Nol! said the younger; “A man who is a chief will not put on a 


Llanket-robe of belly-fat.” ; 
“Yah, this girl is always belittling him!” she said of her sister. 


“And J suppose £ should not think little of him, when he is entirely 


daft!” she answered her. - 
Presently she heard the whooping, a6 the people danced, 
“Sister, J am going to look on!” “ 


“Qo not!” she seid to her younger sister; “We shall get him angry. 
T have no doubt that he has supernatural power, the way he is esteemed.” 

Se it likely that one who is held in esteem would wear pieces of fat 
for his blanket-robe?” she asked her. . . i 

“Khe is always belittling him, this girl, and no one clee!”’ 

“Borh, it is only you who hold him in esteem, that crazy-mian! Please 
let me go look on, big sinter,” 

“Very well. Just for a short while. You will see what he does to us, 
Hf he pees you!’ 

“Well, Puhall try not to let him see me.” 

Accordingly, she went and Jooked on. When she peeped in through 
the door, why, there she saw her husband being kicked about, while the 
people eried, “They are having a lot of fan with Well-Diver!’ and there 
wos only his little head sticking out, for he was all covered with dirt, and 


the fat fe wore as a bienket, was all trodden to bits. She despised him more 


than ever. ‘ ke, 

When HelleDiver saw his wife peeping in, 8p he jumped to his feet, 
and an old woman who vat there, her he kicked. and kieked, erying, “I'he 
are having lot of fun with Hell-Diver!’” whereupon, “Heavens, Hell- 
Diver ix abusing an old women!” the people said of him, 

That youn? wife ran hore. 

Bhe seal, “piston, Unt, husband of ours must be indeed of srsall account, 
he who you Admire wo! Come, let us be offf As for me, | hate the crazy 


~ fool,” she anid to the other, 


"Gondnend, Tan ware he has manitou power! We will kill us”? 

“Sa it bikely he would be kicked about, if he had manitou power? He 
WOW nol be treated thet way. Because he is crazy, they use him as a 
butt,” she told the other, 

“Sait, bow ean we de ite? \ 

“S phall take two tree-trunks,” ssid the younger sister. 

"Yer? whe answered, ‘ 

Acoordingly, the went and got those trees and chopped them to the 
length Of Whore women. Jn the place where she was to lie, the young 
worn Jaid the one treetreunk, 

“Mow then, there are to be many bees here!-—When he uncovers you, 
that Nell-Diver, anes) bin in full number, and fight him! Therel—-Now, 
youl” she said to her elder sister, ) 

Over there, too, she placed « tree-trunk, and pulled the coverlety 
ver th. ‘ 

“iow then, bere shall be many bugs!” she said to it. 

Then, when the thus covered them, “When he Jies down here, bite 
bisa, bugs!” phe told them. , 

“how, carne, sider! Let us flee!” she said to her. 

They fed, 


al 


309 


Then, when it was almost daybreak, the dancing stopped, and Hell- 
Diver went home. He really did bring some of the good food from the 
fenst. 

“Tere, wives, is the eerernonial meal!” 

They suid nothing to him. 

“A nine days’ wonder, what sound sleepers they arc!” he said. 


Ce ee ee ee ee ee ee 


“ 


So he necds lay down somewhere or other. It was broad daylight, 
when he awoke. When he raised his head, his wives were still sleeping. 

“Get up, Alnée! It is broad day!” he said. 

She did not get up. \ 

"You, at least, Cadette!”’ 

When she did not get up, he got up himself. When he threw back 
the younger one’s covers, all the bees flew up, and the whole swarm went 
for him and stung him here and there, until his face was all covered, and 
meanwhile those bugs kept biting his fect. At last he ran out of the tipi, 
with his cyes barely a little open, what with the way the becs had ‘treated 
tin. 

When people heard the noise he was making in his tipi, they said,’ 
“Ts he not perhaps killing his wives? Let us go seel” they said of him. 

As for him; he went to the water, to the river, taking with him some 
blood. Then he embarked, singing the while. 

“Ty ho not perhips, having killed his wives, about to kill himself?” 
was said of him. ; : 
1 When he drew his knife, “fey, be is going to stab himself!” they said 
of him, \ oo 

And really, he stabbed the yessel full of blood, and, when the blood 
spurted all-over, “He is killing himself!” they said of him. 

; Then he tipped his canoe and got under it, hgfding to it as it drifted 
along, 
“Hey, Hell-Diver has killed himself! Wis canoe has tipped!" 

“Then, as he was carried away by the current, “Truly he is bringing 
grief on his wives! Sry to get hold of him! was said of him, and they went 
to fetch hirn in w canoe. 

They got hold of his canoe; he was notin it, for he had dived. 

“Tt seems that be has really killed himsclf!” they said of him. 

far from there he went to shore, having reached a Jittle lake. 

Presently they heard him singing in yonder place. ‘So he is trying 
to fool us, is Hell-Diver! Over there he is singing! You will have to get 
into the water; if-you find him, kill him; he is bringing grief upon hia 
wivess” was sald of him, 

‘Then, when they sought him everywhere in the water, at last, when 
they felt something underfoot, and gave it a few kicks, then they heard 
something go off like a gun. “Shey have stepped on his mother’s belly 
and it bas burst with a bang; ¢o now we have killed him" said those 
people. . 

They left him alone. : 

— Well, that is the end of the sacred story: 


310 


(33) The Foolish Maiden 


Mrs, Maggie Achenam 
Ld-wihkaskusahk, + 

kutak iskwdw sipwahtdw. sipihk ttuhtdw, kd-wdpamdt ndpdwah ah- 
patsitsimayit. 

“ nésth, ? tttk, _ ; 
pistw. pot ohih dh-kitépamdl, dyitaw hih-uhkwdkaniyiwa. , Gkwah 
mallow. . 

“Cnika-pimdtisin,’ dh-itdythtaman tsi?” ik; “ d-wth-méwitan,” 
rik, ° 
dkwah mdtow, 

“Kkiyam apth | uktsttaw misawdls kiwth-méwitin.” 

‘takusinwak ministikuhk. ‘ dkwah kapaw, ; 

“ nohké,” ttwaw dkwah awa wihtikow, “ pd-nds ; pakdsimahkan awa 
hd-pdsiwak, ” a ! 


kiskwaw, 
“namuya kipa-pakisdpamin, 
pakdsimatdn, " ttdw. . 


” 


dkwah dw odskinikiskwiw, “ dhenistawdyimitan,” itiw ; “‘nohkum,’ | 


dh-itéyihtamdan, ” 

“néstsimes disik dwah [ ntdm-kitimahdw. nipahin, nésisdh. pakasta- 
mdyapikastahkan ntakisty. dkutéh uhtst ta-pd-matahtam wihtikow. dkwah 
ha-kiskisin nispitun ; ‘nikuhtd, nohkoh 1? kik-dtwan; ‘ mistikuh” ka- 
tstkahikdn 1? itép anth nika-nikuhtan. dkwah kiyah ka-tapasin., kakwd- 
sohki-tapasi. ; } , . 

lapwd dkwah tapastw. dhwah ahkumah nikuhidyiwah. kdtahtawd 
takusin wihtikow. oo 

“ nOKKGKG, pd-kiwd | niwih-mitsioun,” dtwdw. . 7 

“ tedekwah 1 nintkultan,” itwiw, : 

“dkust kipah 1” a . , 

“Gapihtei-mitsisoh. wipats nika-kiwin,” chwdw notukdstw, usapitun 
pihu dh-nikuktamakaniyik. 

milsisow dkwah wihtukiw. méwiw ohkumah dkwah, thkdylhtam dk 
mi-mayow dh-takuhtdyit shkumah, dkwah ntunikdw. diewah dh-utihtahk, 
pot bmah ohkumah uspituniyiw kd-pahkihtiniyik. —- - 


"tdntd dh-kiy-itdmuyan, kd-kininalsihiyin, nohkum dh-nipahat? nipa-— 


paminawatikuh | kiwihqnmitiauhutin, ' idw, . 
dkwah nawoswiw wihtikow awa. dkwah tapastw -uakinthiskwdw. 


kdlahtawd kisiwik. pdtwiwitamiytwah.> dhwah makwdyimow, » 

“ nhe-nipehih dhuah,” itdyihtam. 

ulihldw ayiniyiniwah dh-uwaskdhikaniyit. 
*tawinah | niwih-nipahik wihtikow,” itdw, 

namuya tipwdhtak, 
“ kipah, nistded | kitimakihtawin | niwih-nipahik wihtikow, ” itdw. _ 
piyts yohtdnamiyiwah, pihtukdw dkwoh. aeay takupahtdyiwah. 

‘ vbhtdnamawin ) niwikimdlan niplh-nawuswdldw," itwodw. f 
namuye tipwdhlamawdw, . - 
“Kipah yohtinah | niwikimakun niwih-wapamaw.” 


pi-ndtaw nolsukdsiw. pdstwdw wikihk, dkwah kildpamdw aw Gskini- . 


yo - a . to eh 
itwdw notsukdsiw ; “ misawdle d-wih- 


al , 
a 


¢ woe | 
. \ 
: st 4 . 
dkwah : iskwdw, “ka wiyah, ka yohuinah I. wihtikow | aa, namuya 
niwikimdkan. ’ “i, 7 
dkwah rdpdw, “ yohtinah | niwikimikan pipii-nataio ” 
“ namuya 1” itwéw. 28 a Mee 


‘keitahtawd ndpdw yohténam, apihtew Gukelah ah-pihtukayit niipdwah, 
kipivdpinam ; nipahéw. dkwah iskwdw wayowiw. mihtah mihtsdt ultima. 
dkwah pénam. napdwah dkutah isiwipindw'; mdstihkaswdw. « 

dkwah ustdésah, "' kdyd kékway Gtinah:}"' 

kahkiyaaw hdkway pimastdw ; uyakanhisah dmihkwdnisak sistpaskih- 
’ Lusak paskwahamdtsbwinisah ah-mi ywasikth, d-sikwahkasut awah wihtikow. 

utinam uydkanis. j~bthtthkéhkanghtam. ali-kutawipayiyiw, 

“ nistisi, nistdsd'!” itwdw. a ; 

pd-wayawiyiwah ustésah ; ulinamtytwa. 

“ kaya kihtwém kékway utinah {? 

‘pah-pdstahamiyiwah kahkiyaw.= ‘dhust dkwah pihtukdw. dkwah usth- 
tayiwa ndpdwah aydwinisah. dkwah pustaydwinisdw dékunih napiw- 
Gyéwinisah. dkwah sipwdhtdw. 

kdtahtawd dh-pimuhtét kd-wadpahtahk sdpuhtawan dheut dh-akusiyit 
ayisiyiniwah. pd-nihtakusiyiwah Gh-dkwdskakul. 

‘"métawétan, ” atk. ag 
“ namuya, ” itaw; “nikiwan,” itdw. a 
(7 piyis sdkétsimik. ‘ 

“ kiya nikdn,” itéw; “ mdtawiy,” ildw. ; 

dkwah mdtawdwak. skwiw awah sdkotsihdw.  kiwihtahik napdwah 
Ghé ; sdpuhtawadnihk tuhiahik, dkwah misakamik wapamano~ piststk tek 
wiwah dh-kaskihtsikwandskikdsowit. 


dkwah kakwdtsimdw, “ tansi ch-toldhiuydle [” 


“ Kihtsikusiw-anah mistikuhk ;- pd- Teodshewdkutsin ; ; nihtoibwaninah . 


pahkisin ; i nikuskatiskékundn manah.s” _ 
“ dkwah namuy dkust niya nka-titdk 1" a 
pd-pihiukdw. ndpdw kihtsdékusiw. : ea 
“ap dkutah 1” idwiskwiwoh, =< i 
dkwah iskwdw aw dpiw. dkwah kwaskwikutsin awa. sient itisinam 
iskwéw awa. kisisimdw ; nipahdw. - dkus ist dkwah parikow, miywiyth- 
tumwak oki iskwdwak, usdm dhekitimahihtsik. 


 ndyakwanuhk wiprodhtdh tdnt dh-uhtaiyih {7 : -_ 

. namuya kiskdyihtamwak. tant h-dsi-sijpwdhtdteik, piyie dkwah inleblleo 
Guiht sipwihtuhdw wikiwahk isi. dhkwah takusinwak ndld. mitdtaht dakwd- 
woh wilsdwiw. dkwah miywdythtamiyiwoh ustdsah dh-lakusihk,  mitdl- 
asiyiwah ustdsah. dkwah minah mitdtaht kd-pdeiwdl. miyupayryiwah 
ustdsah, dkwah dkutah aydwak. wiwiyiwah ustisuh, 

kdtahlawd kd-stpwdhtdt minah kihtwam., wawaskdsiwah kwednihils, 

Sdkwah pukwdtamiyiwah dh-kwasihikul, kutakah minah pisiskiwah, dkwah 
wiya miywdythtam takwdew. - undpdmiw wawiskdsiwah. dkwah dhwatsist- 
wanthkdyit dkutah nukatik, dh-kitowit dkewah wawaskdsiwah, dh-ppdmpah- 
tdyit, sipd pdmpahldyite: iskwdwah dh-pimi-kihkdmikut. ayis numa nintaw 
kiy-ivi-kthidkusiyiwah ta~pakamahukul. kdtahtawd kd-plipkitowit kistwile 
dyakunth undpdmah, ot dmah misiwd uy-utstkisiyiwd Ay-iepinatimiht, 

dkwah mitunth d-wik-nipahahkatusguit. 


1¥rom here on the story is obscure. , 


312.—C«; an 
dkwah wihtamak : “ kistésak wih-nipahadhkatuséwak," itik; ‘ dkwah 
nka-ntaw-dsamdwak niyaw. kdwth itép nk-dpisisinin,” 1th, 


“Gha’ [” 


dkwah ituhtéw ustdsah. 
“ka wiya maka. ta-pikwahtamwak niskanah. uski-pahkékinuhk ta-— 
wéwdkastawak ; nikutis ta-ntaw-astawak. néwu-tipiskake kawih nika- 


takupahtan. ” 
dkusi dkwah nipahéw. ustdsah d-kth-néwu-tipishayik takusiniyiwah, 
“ dkwah kistawdw awitd |” itéw.ustdsah. ee 


matow iskwéw ; .mihtatéw ‘undpémah. ae 
Gkusi wiy dyoko. . a . 


, 


Another woman set out. She came to a river, and there she saw a 
man approaching in @ cance. a“ a 

“Get in,” he said to her. 

She stepped aboard. There, when she looked at him, he had a face at 
either side of his head. Then she wept. 

“Is it ‘Do let me live!’ you are thinking?” he asked her; “My inten- 
tion is to eat you,’’ he told her. a 

She wept. ; 

“Sit atill! It is no use; I mean to-eat you.” ~ 

They reached an island. He disembar 

“Grandmother,” cried that Windigo, #CS e fetch her: prepare. to. 
boil this person I am bringing.” 

A little old woman came and fetched her. pone’ b 
der to her lodge. The young woman gazed at her. 

“You don’t stop staring at me,” said the little old woman; “What 
matter, since I am bound to boil you?” she said to her. . 

Then the young woman answered her: “It is because I recognize you, 


tought her over yon- 


_ because ‘My grandmother,’ is what I am saying to myself.”. 


“And go it is my grandchild! I had almost been her ‘undoing! Kill 
me, my grandchild. Then set the whole string of my entrails into water. - 
That is what the Windigo will eat first. Also you will cut off my arm; 
‘Chop wood, grandmother!’ you will say; ‘You are to split wood!’ ; Then I 
shall really split wood. And as for you, you will be running away. ‘Run 
with all your might!” 

Then she ran away. Her grandmother chopped firewood. Soon the 
Windigo arrived. 

“Grandmother, come home! I want to eat!” he cried. 

“Wait a bit! Iam gathering wood,” she said. 

- “Be. quick, now!’ 
“Do you eat meanwhile. I shall be back soon,” said the old woman, 


- while her arm all by itself cut wood. 


Thé Windigo began to eat. He ate his grandmother. “He was im- 


.patient because his grandmother was not ‘coming promptly.: Then he. 
_ began to search. When he came there, behold, there his grandmother’s . 
arm fell to the ground. 


‘Whither can you flee, you who have bereft me by killing my grand- 


a mother! {She cooked for me. I will chase you,” he called to her. 


i . ‘ 
313 . 
Then that Windigo started in pursuit. The young woman fled. Soon, 
he came close with noise. She was in great distress. 
“Now he will kill me,” she thought. - 
She came to a man who had a house. oy 
“Open! A Windigo is trying to kill me,” she called to him. | 
paid no heed to her. oy 
neo eke big brother! Take pity on me! A Windigo is trying to 
“kill mé,” she called to him. 
At last he opened the door. She went in. The other had already got 
there on the run, 
“Qpen the door for me! I come in pursuit of my wife,” he cried. 
_ His words went unheeded. 
“Quick, open! I want to see my wife.” 
Then the woman, “Don’t! Do not open! He i is & Windigo, not my 


i husband. ” 


_eg~ And 'the man, “Open! I have come to fetch my wife.” 

“No!” she eried. 

Then at one time the man opened the door. When the other man had 
got half-way in, he flung it shut; he killed him. Then the woman went 
out.. She took a great’ amount of firewood. Then she made a fire... _Bhe 
threw that-man into it; she burned him up.’ >> --—__ . 

> Then her big brother, “Do not take anything!” oes Ai oo! 

All kinds of things were-lying around; bowls, spoons, kettles, forks, 
all kinds of good things which had fatlen ‘out when the Windigo was burnedx, 
She picked up a bowl; she could not let g9 of it._It began to sink into the 
eart 

“Brother, brother!’ she cried. a 

Out came her brother; he took the thing. , 

“Do not take anything more!” oe 

He smashed all the things. Then she went inside. The man made 
some garments. Then she put’ on those man ’s clothes... “Then she went 


+ away. 


Presently, | as she walked along, she saw a buffalo-lane and a man 
sitting up aloft on it. He came down and headed her off. 

“Let us try our strength,” -he said to her. 

“No,” she answered him; “I am on my way home,’ ’ she said to him. 

But at last he talked her into it. 

- “You first,”’-he said to her; “Show your power,” he said to her. ; 

Then they contended. The woman was defeated. That man took 
her home. with him; he took her to the buffalo-lane. There she saw a 
great crowd of none but women whose knees had been broken. ‘ 

Then she asked them, “What has he been doing to you?” 

“This person climbs trees; he comes leaping down; he falls on our ; 
knees; as he lands he always breaks our bones.” . - 

“Now, he shall not treat me this way!” ; wile 

She came inside. The-man climbed up. ™ 

“Sit there!” he told the woman. 

‘ Then the woman sat there. He leaped into the air. The woman 
held out an iron bar. She impaled him and killed him. Then she rose to 
her feet. Those woman rejoiced, for they had been miserably dealt with. 

“Go, all of you, to whatever place you came from!” 


314 
ay 

They did not. know from where they had come. At last that woman 
took same of them away with her towards her home. They arrived at 
yonder place. She had ten women with her. Her brothers were glad when 
she arrived, en was the sumber of her brothers. And likewise ten were 
they whom she brought. Now her brothers fared well. They stayed there, 
Her brothers now had wives. , ; 

After « time she set out again. A stag took her away with him. He 
did not like it when in turn other animals took her away, But the woman 
herself liked it, . The stag was her husband, Then he made a neat for her 
arid left her there. ‘Chen when the stag bellowed as he ran about, whenever 
he ran by below there, the woman taunted him as he’went by. For he had. 
no way of climbing up there to beat her. Then at one time, hither came 
that hushand of hers and bellowed. He was all covered with scars here 
on his ‘body where be had been attacked, and he was lean to the point of 
staryation. - . 

Then he told her: “Your brothers are starving to death. Now I 
shall go feed my body to them, Afterwards I shall come back to life,” 
he told her, . - ~ 

“Very welll” . 

Then she went to her brothers. co 

Put they are not to crack my bones as they eat. They are to wrap 
them in a fresh hide; they are to put them away, somewhere. When-four 
nights have passed, { shall come running back.’ 6 > | 

Bo then she Slew him. When four nights had passed, her brothers 
arrived. St \ 

“So it is you who have come!” she said to her brothers. 

She wept; she grieved for her husband, 

So much of this. , ‘ 


(34) The Foolish Maidens and One-Leg 


. Coming-Day ‘ 
ka-kisthaw-pihtukiw. : 

-mikiwahpis dh-aydlsik, dh-nisitsik, pisieth dh-papdmuhtdlsik, éh- 
niunuhkik ka-mitsiteik, nama wihkdla ayistyintwa wapamdwak.  nohldi- 
wipaumiwal ayisiyinwa, . 

_ “ maskits napiw wipamayahkih, ka-wikimdnaw, ka-mitsiyahk ta- 
_nipahiat,” ttuwiw aw bmisimaw ; “ dha wiya pakwatahkan. kiyam pikw 
ist maydlisits: nipdw ka-wikiminaw,” iwéw aw omisimdw. - 

“ dha’ ,” usima. . 

dkwah dkutah ay-aydwak piyakwanaw, - ; 

Kituhtawd, ah-tipiskdyik, ah-wih-nipdtsik, ch-kitapamdt aw omisimaw 
atsdhkusah, pdyak kihkéndkusiyiwa ; paéyak apistsisiyiwa ; namuya kihk- 
dnakusiw, 

_Gmisih itwiw an bmisimaw.: “ hd dy, nisimis, tanik oki unapdmiyahk,’ 
tinikt néki atsihkusak ! ndha ka-kihkkandkusit dwakd niy onapdmiydan, 
dkwa kiya ana k-Gpisisivit, ” dléw. . 

“dha!” ith. ue ° 
ilk Ghus dhitéyihtahk : “ dh-miyusit awa ka-kihkaéndkusit,” . dh-itéyih- 


345 © 


dkus ist nipdwak. -kiksipa éh-pikupayit aw Gmisimdw, kd-kiskdyimat 
napdwa d~pimisiniyit.. -éh-mdmiskundl,  ndpdw 1” ttéyihtam. 

waniskdw, dh-kutawdt. 

““' nisimis, waniskah 1" itdw. . . 

wipamdw mina dkutd éh-nipayit nipiwe. awa dh-waniskat usimimaw, 
miywayihtam napéwe éh-pimisiniyll. aw &misimaw itwahamawdw usimisah 
uwikimakana Ghi, tahkih d-wih~paihpit, dh-miywiyihtahk napdwa déh-ayawdt.: 
dkus éh-kisitdput, miniasah pikuh dh-mitsitsik. dkusi waniskiw aw dximimdw 
. uwikimdkana: potth miyusiw uskinikiw. ah, miywéyihtam awa aw iskwéw. 
mwdéstas ka~-waniskdyit aw imisimaw uwikimdkana, pat ohi mituni kisdyiniwa, 
d-wipistikwandyit. pakwdtum d-kisdyiniwiyit. dkusi dkutah ay-aydwak. 
kapd-kisik ay-apiyiwa. dyikuhk d-tipiskdyik, aspin wdh-wayawiytwa, 
dytkuhk kikdts dh-wdpaniyik, kd-takuhtdyit. dkust dh-kawistmuyit. kik- 
sipd mana kah-mitsisutwéui, dh-papdmuhtdtstk usima, minisah éh-ntunah- 
kik, mina mistaskusimina, dkutéwah piku dh-milsitsik, nama wihkdts mat- 
siyiwa Gwikemadkaniwawa. kitahlewé kinwdsk dh-aydtatk, kitahtawd namuya 
misitawinam askiy aw 6misiméw. tapiskéts dké wihkdts dh-wadpahtahk askly 
. déythtam. kaskdyihtam, pihtaw dh-pakwatahk kisdéyiniwa Gh-undpdmit. 
piyisk pisisik papdmuhtiw, dkwah kaskdéyihtam nam dwiya dkutah ka-kih- 
aydisik ; dyuko uhtsi k-ch-kaskdythtahk. kitahtawé maka mina dh-papd- 
myhtitstk, mistaskusimina dh-papih-minahahkik, kd-wapahtahk | wisti- 
pahkwayikamtk. 

“nisimis, dkwah kiyokdtdn 17 itéw. . 

, tépwé Gh-atuhtdtsrk, dh-takuhtdtsik, awan bhi, nitukdsiwa. 

! nésisimak, nosisimak 1" itwiyiwa. = — 

nhiukdwak. asamdwak mistaskusimina. 

“hay, lanwi mistahi kitatamihindwaw, nésisimitik | kayds noh-akd- 
witin, ah-pihtamén 4d-kih-pisikawiyék, ‘ mistaskusiminah dh-ulinahkik 
tahkth,’ dh-ttikawtydk. ” . so 

“ nahka, d-kih-tm-pdsikawiyahh 2?” itéw. 

, dha 1” ttiw; “ nésisd, ‘ntaskinahk dh-aydydhk,’ dh-itdyihtaman 
isiw oma?” ; . 

“ dha’ .” ; ; 

“namuya, nésisd | ispimthk ima dh-aydydk, Old nihtsdythk d-kiy- 
uhtuhtahikawiydék," dik; “ noslsd, ‘ ayisiyintwak tsi! k-indpdimiyahk, ' 
éh-itéyihtamik ?” 

bs dha . ced 

“namiuy dniki. k-dyisiyiniwiyin, ‘ atsahkusak,’ k-dtwayin, dkutowahk 
anah. nama ts, ‘ anah kd-kihkdydsGwat dwaku undpimiydn,’ kikth-itwin? - 
dwakow ana kéndpimin kistyiniw. dkwah,‘ ana éké ké-taspdaGwdt dyakuni 
undpdmiyin,? kikth-itiw kisim ; dyaké uhtst anth Oskinikiwa kd-witsdwat, ”’ 

“ hddy, nohké, kah-kih-tsi-pihkuhindn ta-kiwiydhk ? nigikiskdtdndn 
nitaskindn, ” itéw. : ° 

“haha , nosisd ; ayisk kikdkipdtisin, ah-kth-ndhtah-undpimiyin at- 
sGhkus,!’ itth; “haw, nésisé, ntunah mistaskusimin. mustusu-mdy itah 
dh-astik, dkutah sakikihkih mistaskusimin, dwaké kik-thpindn. dhutah 


! The interrogative particle comes.near the beginning of thé sentence, usually after 
the first word; here it is inserted in a quotation of which it does not form a part. Compare 
ite insertion in the verbal complex immediately below, ea 


° 


a 


° 316 , 
; ; 

anima d-pakundyék 6m askiy,” ittk; “ miskaméku, ka~pd-wihtamawin- 
dwiw.” oo 

“ dha’ |” , ; 

wayawiwak, dh-ntunahkik, kiyipa miskamwak. dkusi ntawi-wihtam- 
awdwak Ghkumiwdwa, 

“ nimiskdndn, '' itdw. 

dkust utinamiyiwa usckipatwdndydpisiyiw. 

‘haw, dmah mistikuhk tahkupitamuhkak. dwak dma kik-sh-pihkuhun- 
dwaw. watsistwan usthtdk, dkutah kit-apiydk. Misthtéydku, wih-nihtakust- 
yaku, kiya ka-wiwdkistikwindn, namuya ka-nandlawdpin, iskuh kitaski- 
yiwiw ulthiamant, awa pikuh kisimis dywaku kit-dtipiw. dkwah nété 
lekusiniydku, ‘ndhk6, dwakwd kisékipatwindyapiy {’ kik-dtwan, nosisé, ” 
itdw ; “ haw, ntyak 1” : ; 

wayawiwak, ch-ituhtétsik om tah ka-pakwandyak askiy, dkwah dy- 
usthidisik watsistwan. d-kisthidtsik, dkwah mistikuhlh tahkupitamwak uma 
pisdkandyas, ikwah dh-pbsitsik watsistwanihk, dkwah é-nthtakusitsik, ah- 
pakitapihkinisutetk.- wéwakistikwandw awa umisimaw, ah-nihtakutsihkik. 
jHilahtowd, “ nisimis, tandhki ? namdskwa isth kitaskiyinaw kiwépah- 
lin ?”? ; . ‘ 

- “dha ! nama tsdskwah !” itéw, 

Kitahtawd ké-wapahtahh. 

dkwah aw éskinikiskwiw, “ nisimis, namé tsdskwa kiwdpahtén ?” 

“ dkwa ani niwdpahtén. ” 

| “hey hay ! ékwah é-wih-talusintyahk kitaskiyinaw, nisimis { mahtih 

nik-dtapin 1” ‘ 

“akaé wiya! kikth-itikunaw kéhkuminaw, ‘ iyikuhk kitaskiyiwaw 


s 


wakuhtiydku, kik-dtapin,’ d-kih-itisk,” itiw umisah. 


tahkin ah-yasipayitsik, takkih kakwdts(mdw usima taskiyiwaw. 

" kdlkdlsedkwah } mitun dkwah kihkandkusiwak mistikwak,” itéw. 

“ nistmisy mahti nik-dtapin 1” itéw. 
Gh-) “aka wiyah ! kistwak dkwah 12 dGheitikut -usimisah, ahts pikuh 


- wih-kakwi-tlépiw. dtuh d-wiwakistikwéndnikut usima, kitahtawd pdski~ 


{ 
i 


ain. 


puytkow, ah-wapit. paskipaylyiw dma k-o-sakahpisutsik. nihtsipayiwak 
dkwah, Gh-kinusiyit mistikwah, dkutah okutaskutsiniyiw Oma watsistwan. 

“ tdpwd kikakipatisin, nimisd, d-kth-ttikuyahk kohkuminaw dha ka~ 
lapudhiaman !"' itéw bmisah. ; ; 

_ hah, miywiyihtamwak waskiyiwaw ah-wapahtahkik. mdka namuya 
kth-pihkuhowak ; dhuté ay-akusiwak. Kitahtawé kd-wapamdateik éh-padpah-~ 
tayit mahihkanah, , 7 

‘ hdy, nisimis, nka-waydsimaw mahihkan ; ka-pihkuhikunaw,” itéw. 

chu’ , : . “ 
, _G, kastwiik ah-pimuhtdyit, dmis itéw: “ mahihkan !” ah-kitapamikut, 
pihkukindn ! dh-mitsimuhuydhk, nihtinindn, ahpoh itsih ka-wilimitin- 


~“ yahoh ! namuya nnihta-lihisdbusin. mina kik-dlamihinawaw yma 


“wihkats payokwonuhk ntayan, pisisik ch-papdmatsihuyan, ” itwaytwa. 


*  " sisiy L misawd 19) tapwi ka-kih-wikimitanin, sh-mdydtisiyan, ah- 


hinwapakihkwaéyan, ékwah Gh-kdsakéyan, kékway ndépahidyanih éh~péy- 


_akohkaman 1." itéiw, aih-kihkamat. 


3 Start toward including quotation in verbal complex. 


4 


317 


ékusth ay-aydwak dkutah, kitahtawd ké-waipamatsik minah kutakah 
ch-papahtaytt.: potih dyukunih pisiwah. 


“ha dy, nisimis, dyakuw dkwah ka-waydsimanaw ! nihtawahtawiwak 


aGkutéwahk.—héh !°’ Gtah ch-pimuhtdyit, “hd & dy, pisiw 1” 
. " tanahkih 1” 
 pihkuhinan { ahpah itst ka-wikimitinan, aka ah-kih-nihtinisuyahh 1”? 
yah6 ! namuya nnihta“kihtsdkusin. th wapahtah misihtsiyah : nama 
hakwat naskasiyak, ” dtwiyiwa. 
“ “a & dy, misawa isi tapwa ka-kih-wikimitahk, ah-mayatisiyan, ‘Gh- 


pitikuhkwayin, dkwah éh-maémahkisitiyin, dkw é-nd-napakaskituydyin-? Me 


ay-itawadyimdw. dkust nakatikuk, G, kaskdythtamwak, d-nihtd-nth- 
takusitstk. piyisk kinwdsk dkutah aydwak.' kitahtawé ka-wapamatsik mina 
Géh-papahtayit, 

‘nisimis, dywakw dkwah nika-waydsiméw. _wih-wawiwinawisiw ' 

dwaku,” itdw. tO 

“ aha’. 

kisiwak d-pimipayiyit dtah, “hd dy 1” an 

iapiyiwa, oN 

“ kthkwahakds, kinihtd-kihtsékusin. pihkuhinan. Gh-kustamahk aka 


Gh- hah-pihkuhisuyahk. ahpoh itsi, pihkuhiydhkuh, ka-uikimitindn, ” itiw. 


 yaho, kiwth-waydsimindwaw |” itwéyiwa. 
“namuya ! tapwd ka-wikimitindn, ” ttéw. Sa, 
“6 aha’ [7 ; : : : 


-haw, pa-kihtsdkusiyiwa. 
dy-ulchtikutsik, ‘ ‘niya nikan !" ttwéw aw émisimdw. 
‘ namuya f awa pitah kistm.”? | 
. dha’. 
dkwah nayomaw dkwah. ; 
“ haw, aka wiyah mustsih sdmiskaw nitakuhp. mituni nikibtedyimavo 
‘nitakuhp,” itdw oh dskinikiskwdwa. 
mitunt wiwikiw aw dskinikiskwdéw, gh-nihisatsiwihtahikut. plyis 
pihkuhiw. pitah omis ist tah-tihtipiw awa kihkwahakis, oho wakuhpah ah- 
kdsisimdt, 6h iskwdéwa d-sdmiskawdyit. ~  - 


dsay dkusi itéythtam nah é6misimaw : “ nihtinitsih, nika-yipdtsthimdwa 


wakunpal, kd-kistdyimut 1") itéyimaw. 
dkwah pdy-dmatsiwayiwa. mina. 


ttwdyiwa. 
dkwah nayomik. 


dkwah Gh-nihisatsivdyahtawiytt, pagahtik ah-pimuhtdyit, “ kisiskdhtd, 
_ kthkwahakis ! nikaskéythtén, ah-nohtd-sdmskaman ntaskty,” itwéw aw 
iskwew. . 


‘ 


: 1 Obscure; perhaps & nonce-formation: If really derived from wiwah : “his wife” 

(niwah : “my ‘wife, ” etc.), perhaps read wih-uwiwinaursiw ; for the general rule in Central 
Algonquian is that secondary derivatives of dependent nouns are madé from the form with 
third person possessor; those in ni-, ki-, wi- prefix w-, e.g. wisliwah : “his io asa s 
uwistdwiw :. “he has (as) a brother-in-law”; ; and those in nd-, k6-, 6- prefix uu~ 
ohtawiya : “his father”: uwohtawiyiw : “he has (as) a father.!’ But the Sweet t Gress 
“dialect; seems to confuse this initial accretion with reduplication, eg. uyohtawiyiw ; he 
has (as) a father,” cf. below. 


$3186-—21 


dy-ulihtik ul, ! ‘haw, mitunth inawdkapih. nitakuhp nikihtsdyimdw,’’ . 


l 


— 318 


Ghisi pikuh pdyahtik dh-pimuhtdyit, waniskdpayihow aw iskwdw, dh- 
kahkapd-téhtapit, Ghi Kkthkwahdkdsah d-sikitat. kwdt(pipaythuyiwa, dh- 
nihtsipaythuytt. . 

“ténwé kikakwéhyakihdw nitakuhp ! nikatawaldyimadh nitakuhp |” 
itwdyrwa. , 

dkwah aw iskwdw kd-nihtsipayit, uhteikwanthk kaskatdsin, 

dh-ati-sipwihtayit kihkwahdkdsah, aw Omis tUwdw uskintkiskwdw : 
“hd dy, kthkwahdkds, tyikuhk kd-wisakisimiyin, ntawdts anim itah ked-sikilal: 
kitakuhp kakikd dkutah ta~masinaséw, isku tit-dskiwik 1" itdw 3°“ mina 

'  dsdskwa ayisiyiniwak ka-wih-uhpikitatk, nama wihkdte’ kika-méiwikwak ; 
ka-wihtsdkisin, d-sikititan, “ kihkwahakds,’ k-datyihkatikwak,”’ - 

dkust sinwéhldyiwa. 

“hd, nisimis, itah mihtah dh-mihtsdkih ituhtahin, ” itdw. - 

d, tapwd utakuhpthk dkwah uldpatik usima, itah mihtah dh-mihlsdini- 
yikih, dkutah d-takuhtayikut. dkwah usthtaw wikiwdw nipiyah uhlsi uma 
wikiwaw, dkwah aw bskinikiskwdw pisisik dh-nikuhtdt, dh-pénamawdl umisa, 
d-wisakdythtamiyct Gm Oskatiyiw, dkad mwdsi dh-nipdyit, dh-wdh-wapaniyik 
dh~ponahk, piyisk kinwds wisakdyihtam ; namuya kih-tniyiw. kitahtawi 
usima dh-nikuhtayit, utinam mohkumdn, dh-kiskisahk Gm Gakdt itah ka- 
natwahtiniyik. dkwah mistahi sdkamuyiw gma uskan. dkwah dwaks 
tsikaham mohkumdn uhtsi, dh-atsiwikahahk. dh-kiwdt aw dakinikiskwdw, . 
kd-pdhtahk dh-matwd-tsikahikdyit umisah. tstk dh-ihidt, ponihldyiwa, dh- ~ 
akwanahamiyit, dh-kdtayit. namuya wapahiam dh-totamiyit umisah. 

dmis dh-itiyihtak aw Gmisimdw': “ nisimis nika-wiwin," dh-itdyih- 
tahk, “ 6mow uhtsi niskdt," dhitdyihtahk. 

ih, kitahtawd dh-nah-nikuhldyit mana aw sskintkiskwdw, kitahtawi 
moydyimdw umisah, kakikd dh-kitipamikut, tahkih d-wth-pahpthikut. 
kitahtawd dh-nikuhtdl, dkutah pitsiktskisisah ké-tah-twdhuyit, i... ~ 

“ ay, iskwiw, d-wih-wihtamdlan | dsay dhwah kisihtdw kimis uskat dh- 
kinikikahahk, dh-wth-wikimisk. kika-nipahik. tapast 1" itch. 

: edkimik. mt 

“tantéh mak oma k-dtuhtdyjan?  ~ 

“ 6td isi, ndtakam, ” itdw, 

b“é aha’ . ” ia 

dkwah kdtikuskawdw wanakwaya. 
| haw, nanakwatik, nikuhtdk | nimis mitwd-ldpwatikuydku, ‘tsdekwa |? 

- wihk ; ‘médkwats ninikuhtan,’ itihk. ‘kiyipa !’ itikuydku, ‘ tedkwah | 
hi site mihtedt d-wih-ndtwahamdan, sdskwdte t-dwatdydn,’ itahkik. ” 
dkust_nikuhtawak dkwah oki anakwayak. tapastw dkwah-aw tekwiw. 

kitahtawd,*nisimis |” ka-matwi-itwayit ; “poni-nikuhta 12? 

dkwah, “ tadekwah t?twdyiwa, . 

“ kiyipa !” ka-matwd-twiyit, kitahtawd,  ntwa 1" k-dtwdyit; “ pd- 
kiwd | nikaskdythtin, ntwa, dka mayaw th-pd-kiwdyan, ” twdyiwa. 

G, lapasiw wi ‘a, -_ ° a ‘et 
~  pryisk thkdythtam awa, “ pd-kiwd, ntwah 1" k-dtwdt dyak Omisimaw. 

; " tedskwah [*? 

“ yaha 17° ‘ 

kitahtawd,; “ ka-kisiwahin, niwa ! pd-kiwd 1” 

" tedekwa t pitdni niwth-nikuhtan. ” 

piyisk pasikow aw tekwdw, dhwah d-nitawdpamdt ustma. 


ay 


319 


/ 
“wdad nama kipa-péhidn ! dkwah kiwth-ntawi-pakamahutn, niwa ! 
zim nama mayaw kipé-kiwin 1” 
dkwah pdyak pikw uskat dh-Gpatsihial, itah kd-nikuhléyit usima éh- 
ituhtdl, tsikt dh-ihtat, poni-nikuhidyiwa, kutak d-sakdyik dkuti kaw a- 
matwakahikiyit, d-matwi-nikuhtayit. 
“ Ghisi pikw dwa kah-nikuhidt, “Gh-Gta-td-tépwatak | kikisiwahin ani | 
ulihiitint, kaka-pakamahutin, niwa 1 itdw usima. 
dkwah dh-ituhtét, Kitahtawd ké-wdpamdt anakwayah..dh-nikuhtayit. 
dkwah | Banh a oki anakwayak. 7 
hah, tipwd nikisiwéhtk niwa, ké-tapasit { ntsawdls itah atimitani, 
ka-nipahitin, niwa 1” ttdw, dkwah dh-niunawil, 
kitahtawd ka-mdtahdat, Ghwah dh-mitihtat. 
“ namuya misawits ta-pihtediw itih tait-dtamuyin 1’ itdw usima. 
ah-pa-pimdmut aw iskwiw, dkwah kisiwak dh-pdy-ihldyit'wmisah, “ hé 
dy | ténléh bya nimusom 1” itwaw.: 
utah dh-at-ispahtat, kd-pd-matdwisiyit wakayosah, 
“hd dy, nimusd, kakwd-pimatsihin | nimis niwih-nipahik.” ' 
“hd hd hd & ha ha, nésisd, nistah ni, nikustaw kimis | manitowiw kimis. 
dyiwihk maka btah kwayask ilamuh.” 
hd, dkust tapasiw aw iskwdw: hah, kiyipa ka-pd-sdkdwat aw iskwiéw. 
“néy, iskoh dwakunth dh-mamistt niwa 1” itwdw, dh-utihtat ; “ wak- 
ayGs, Uiniwd niwa ?” 
“  taniwitukd {” itdw. : 
‘nama ts kikdldw niwa? kiyipah wihtamawin py \ 
“ namuya nikiskdyimaw.” \ 
“kiyipah | maskots kikdtwawin. kaka ka-nipahitin. ” 
: Gta wih-kisiwasiw wakayds'; maka namuya nantaw kth-télam. dyak 
m6 uhtsi kd-kiskadyik uskdt, dyak Ohtst tah-tahkiskawiw 6hi wakaydsah ; 
nipahiw, Ghtsi pikw dkeutah munikiw. dsay mina maléhdw usima ; kewah 
ming mitsihisipayistawdw, kitahtawd min dkwah kistwék Gh-atiy-askowdt, 
“ hdy, tantih Gy nimusim 2?” itdw, pot dwakuni misi-pisiwa. 
min iyikuhk awa dydta-takuhtat, ‘ ha ay ! iskoh dwakuni Gta ch-mam- ; 
isit niwa 1” itdw, d-ndsdwisit, dh-lakuhtat ; “ misi-pisiw, tiniwd niwa ?” 
‘ “ tiniwatukd 9” 
“ kahtsindh kikatuwin ! kigipa wihtamawin tantah dh-kétat niwa l 
kdka ka-nipahitin 1” . 
“ namuya nikiskdyimaw, ” 
'  “kiyina [kititin uma | wihtamawin niwa 1” 
pisind d-wih-kitutat, dsay kd-tahkiskawat ; nipahiw. tdpiskote ayisk 
dh-paskiatvdt, dy-isi-sohkdpaytyik uma uskGt aw Gmisimaw. dkwah d-kih- 
nipahdat, dkwah mina nitunam ttah dh-pimuhtéyit usima. tdpwd mina 
matihdw. dkwah mina mitthtdw. kitahtawd min dkwah kisiwak adkwah 
tskowdw. 
Kuahtawih dmis twdw ; “hd dy | taniwahk nimuso 7" itwdw. 
polih, d-sdkdwdpahtat, kd-wadpamdt misi-kindpikwa. . 
“haw, nosisd, dyiwthk Gtah pimamuh | dla wiy ani nikustaw kimis ; 
manitdwiw, ” Gtk, 
“hd & dy, nimusd, kakwi-nipah | d-wih-nipahit anah nimis 1” itdw. 
dkus dh-tapasit. -Kitahtawd dh-sdkdwdépahtat. 
“hay { iskdh dwakuni dh-mamisit niwa 1” 
89186-~215 


320 


ttah bhi k-dydyit, dkutah nakiw, 

“ misi-kindptik, taniwa niwa !” 

“hd, namuya nikiskdyimaw.” 

“ wthtamawin | dh-kdtwawiyin, ka-tah-tahkiskatin | ka-nipahitin 1” ° 

aha, pising éh-waskawiyit, tahkiskawdw ; piyis nipahdw. dkusi mina 
Gh-ntunawdl. usima, kitahtawd kd-wapahtahk itah dsah d-kih-pimamuyit. 
dkwah min dyakuni mitihtdw. dkwah nama kdkway ta-mamisit aw uskini- 
kiskwiéw. kitahtawd dh-pa-pimipahtat, kd-wadpahtahk sdkahikan éh-ahk- 
watiniyik, kd-wipamdt ayisiyiniwah dkhutah tdwakdm. dyakunih dkwah 
moskistawiw. dh-utihtat, awin Ghi, péyakukdléyiwa, éh-misikitiyit asiniya 
Gh-nayomdayit, dh-tstkahwayit miskwamiya, dh-dskaytt. 

“hay, nimus6, kakwé-pimdtsthin, d-wth-nipahit nimis ! pimdtsihiyini, 
ahpoh ttst kika-wikimitin, ? itdw. 

namwdls kitipamtk ahpoh ; namuya kitutik. ; 

“hé dy, ahpoh itst kik-dyohtawimitin, pimdtsthiyini 1” 

namwats ahpoh wih-ka-kilapamik. dkwah kaskdyihtam, kisiwak dkwah 
dh-pdy-aydyit umisah, co 

“ hay, kiyipah kakwd-pimdtsthin, d-wih-nipahit manilow !” | 

dkuyikuhk kd-kitépamikut. 

‘“namuy Gna manitéw. kimis ana,” itik. 

“dha’; mak d-wih-nipahit ! kakwd-pimdtsihin. ahpih itsi kik- 
Ostdsimitin, ’’ itdéw, 

"oo ahd’ ,” 

dkwah miywdyihtam awa pdéyakukdt. 

“ 6tah,”’ itéw, “ dtah pimipahtah 1” 

tdpwa dkutah ati-pimuhtdw tastawayakap.? . 

“ dyakw dni anima mdskands ati-pimuhté. mdskanéhk kapdyani, ka- 
wapahtan, waskahikanis. dkutah takuhléyani, dkutah pihtukdhkan, nisim, ” 
tldw dkwah., 

a, miywéyihtam aw uskinikiskwéw. tapwdé alt-sinwdpahtaw dkwah. 
ayis dkwah palisdpamdw umisch. tdpwd dh-ati-kapdt um d-sakdyik, ah- 
maldwisit, kd-wapahtahk waskahikanis mituni d-miywdsiniyik. dkutah 
pihtukdw. . 

dkwah awa utihtéw witsi-pdyakukdtah. “ " 

 néyakukal, tintwa nina?” itéw, 

tapiskots dka nanitaw dh-itdt, Ghtsi pikuh dh-dskdytt. 

“kiy uma k-d{itin, pdyakukdt ! kanik ot dw an* dka wth-kitépamit | 
tdniwé niwa? kititin éma! kéka ka-nipahitin, aka ka-wé-kd-kitusiyin |?’ itdw. 

Ghtsi pikuh ta-teikahikdyiwa, nandtuhk dh-ttat, “ nka-kakwd-wihtam- , 
Gk,” Gh-itéyihtah. . , _ 

Kitahtawd, “ yaho, k-dtwdwitahk awa ! namuy Gna kiwa ; kisim ana ! 
namuya oma kiya ndpdw ; kiy 6m iskwéw, ‘ niwa,’ k-dtwdyin |” 

“namuya 1!" ttwéw aw iskwiw; “kiyipah kiyém wihtamawin: 
liniwd niwa ? tantah kah-at-ituhtat ?”’ 

“ Gtah," itdw., 

 tintah?” 

“ 6tah, ” itéw. 


"l'See preceding note. 
? The only meaning I could obtain, “between the legs” does not fit One-Leg. If it is 
correct, the narrator has gone astray. 
4 Expression unfamiliar to me, or error of notation; the word division ia a guess. 


Boy - 


“téntah maka, pdyakukat ? kiyipah wihtamawin 1” 
btah tastawayakap dh-wih-ati-sipdsit, Ghi kd-naydmayit asiniyah pakit- 
siwdpiniyiwa, mituni kiskiskohik Gpihtosiyaw ; nipehik dwokuni. 


Ghisi pikw dwa tsa-tsikahikdw. kitahtawd dkuyikuhk kiskisiw dkwah oh 


iskwdwa ; kiwiw, dkwah dh-takuhtdt uwdskahikanisihk, awin éhi, kth- 
apiyiwa usima. dkwah nama kdkway titd-milsiyit. hdw, mthisdt wapamdw 
pihtatwinah dh-akutsiniyit aw iskwdw. ay-apiw awa pdyakukat. 

“yah, dkaé kiékway nisim ntasamdh, k-dtapiydn 1" ttwdyiwa, dy- 
ulinamiyit kitsdhisikanis, dh-miydhkasamiyit, dkwah d-yohtinamiyit. d- 
kituhtat, kiyiple mustuswah kdé-pdpayiyit. dyakunt pah-pimwdw. tyikuhk 


dh-mdstinahk” pdyak oma upihtatwdna, dkuyikuhk poyow. tapastyiwa — 


kahkiyaw mustuswah, 

“ hd, nisim, nipisisah kahkiyaw ntaw-dtinah, " idw. 
, dkust wayawiw aw oskinikiskwdw, dh-utinahk atsusisah, - 

dkwah, “ha, nisim, kahkiyaw utdyantya pikuh utinah,” itdw usima, 
ldpwd aw iskwiw d-kih-utinahk mohkumdn, dh-ntawi-manisahk uliyaniyah 
piku, kahkiyaw dh-utinahk, dkwah d-pihtukdt, dkwah utdyaniyoh dh-kisi- 
aahk, dh-paminawasut. 

dkwah aw éskinikiskwiw dh-wayawit, d-wih~ponahk, bhi mihtsdt kd- 
nipahdyit ustisah namwdta kékway pimisiniyiwa. mdmaskitam, mthtadt 
d-kih-nipahdtsik mustuswah. dlusi éhwah d-kih-mitstautsik, dkwah awa 
nipiw utinam manitiwdkin, kikway dh-ali-miydt oh ésima., 

“haw, nsim, usthidh kitayowinisah,” itdw; “ niya prisivil: nitatuskan 
miskwamthk, tahkih dh-dskiydn. dkaya wihkdts,—kituhtawd awiyak otah 
ta-takuain, nisim,—kdya wihkdls tawinamaw awiyak, piydyakuyini,” ttldw. 

tapwa ka kah-kaskikwatisow aw oskintkiskwidw, dkwah dh-miyuhut, dh- 
nanapdtsthut. dkwah miyustw. tdkuhtitst awa pdyakukdl, miywhyihtam 
ah-kywaydtsih-paminawasuyit usima., dkutah uhtst mistahi kitimadkdyimdw 
oh ésima. numa wihkdls wayawttimihk kdkway ndtamiyiwa, at dh-pdyakuk- 
dldt, , 

iyikuhk kdldétwawi utdyiniya, haw, nisim, ninapidlsihuh ; wawdei,” 
Gh-tdl, kist-wawdsiyitsi, dh-miydhkasahk ukitsGhtsikanis,  hdw, tapimihl 


akust 6tah waskahtkanisihk,” itdw; “ kituhtéh,” itdw ; “ pdépayitwaui , 


mustuswuk, iyikuhk kahkiyaw sipwdpayitwawi, tapasitwawi, ka-nihtukusin, ” 
tldw usima, : Bow . 
dkust miyahkasam ukilsihtsikanis, G, kihtstkusiw aw uskinikiskwdu, 


dkwah wiya pdyakukdt ch-kisi-yohtinehk, kituhtdyiwa, kd-pdpohtayit mus- , 
tuswah, dh-waskdpayiyit wikiwaw Gma. dkwah awa péyakukat ih-notsihat, 


tyitkuhk, dkuyikuhk d-tapastyit, dkuyikuhk nihtakusiw aw uskinikiskwdw. 
G-kih-akutdt kitsuhtsikanis, “ nhdw, ‘nsimis, nipisisah ntaw-dtinah,” 

wayauiw, d-ntaw-dtinahk atsusisah. 

ah-kith-pihtukatat, “ pisisik uldyaniya ulina, risim ; wiyds wiya namuya. 
tahtwiw ménahuydni, tdyaniyah piku kit-Omitsiwiniyin, dy-ist-takahkdyi- 
milan, nisim,” ttdw; “ d-kth-kitimdkisiyin, ‘ mahtih nka-kitimakdyimay 
nisim |’ k-dldyihtamdn,” itdw. . 

dkusi ntaw-dtinam pisisik utdyoniyah. dkwah dkutah aydwak, 

“nisim, dkdya wihkdte wayawi, iydl-Gwiyak-wadpamatsi, takuhtdtsi, 
namuya ka-wayawin. mihtsdtiwak ayisiyiniwak dkd katawa dh-itdtsitsik, ”’ 


Ww. 
. “aha.” - a 


a2 


fipud ké-lapl-kistk plyakiw aw tekudw, wiya awa piyakukat pisistlh 
bh-ntauedinksit snd okersumithh, thwah woih-tipiskiki, dh-ktwit awa pdyakukat, 
miguiylhtam kikikd th-kwaydtatpaminawanuyit uma, mistaht kitimak- 
dyimiw, pikuh b-kakudteimat la-mdetinahkik utdyiniyiw, iyikuhk miyds- 
hinsmiyshka, Ahuyikuhh, “ ninapdtsihuh,” dh-ttat usima, 
kivisimdnapitsihuyit, haw, dkwah mina lhtisdkwd, nidim, ta-kituht- 

a Win. M 

Migr, kituhtayit, mustuswah papayiwa, davaskdpayit wikiwihk, ah 
nhuihit piyjakukal, dyikuhk miydstinahk vapisisah, dkuyikuhk dh-poyut, 
Akus th-taposiyit Aku nihtakusw aw tokaodw, dh-utinahk ateusisah, 
dkurt udyaniya pisivik dh-utinahk, dkust mans oht kd-nipahat th-Apisisini« 
yil, A-atyrothtagygil, ’ . 

Akusi ay-ayiwak, uty dwa tahtu-kisikdw miskwamthk dh-atuskdt awa 
phyokukit, Mluhtowl kinkdyihtam piyakukat d-ufth-lakusiniyit awiya. 

bmis Uw usta: “ nietmis, with-takuhtiw usahWledhk! dha wiya 
lawinamauthkon, namuya kmayosk dh-itdythtahk. usd mintaht misiwd 
pihiakaniudy Ah-kitimaikdyimitan, ‘ ta-kolwd-nisi-wandtisiwak,’ dh-ithyim- 
thowlyoh, ' (Hw usena, 

Aku, a, ki-kupl-livsik dh-nakatit usima, lahtawd dhemistinah 
hakile uldyiniya, pliyakutiw pikuh ta-witsinutsil iyikuhl: ysl, 
hituhtoud ko-lakuhtiyit :. nipiw. namuya nisitandyimiw dwakuni visoh- 
katahkua, 

 ytih, lawinamamin, nisim 1” itth. 

nomuye Uth-ka-kitulhw, noniluhk bh-at-itikeut, 

Kituhtowah tmis tik: “nivim, ' nlaw-ispihtsih-niliih mustugwak, 
histminaw la-nitumiy, kakdle dkwah la-kiwdyahk ; udm nama kdkway 
la-mibeiytihle kikedtpad,? ith-itwit kintisinaw,?” itdw, 

hus Wywtthtiam aw uskintkiskudy, 

" nivih-uuydsimiw ikwah nisim,” itdyihtam, “ awa pilyaleukat.” 

Mined tominamaniw visahkdtethkwa, ihtuldw, 

“haha, nisim, kokwiyahuh dh-nanipitaihuyin. kdkah ka-teatsiwihik 
kiddin, Uke kitkunoy dh-Kiwisaman, ” ith. Oo 

“ywit 1" ithyihtam aw bskintkiskudw, usdm dh-kitimakdyimileut 
uiliinah, bm the, © dkuyi. kitik,” dh-tiht, k-oh-tApnuihtawat, typwd Ah- 
hini-kibdeakuelh wliskahikanihk aw takmdw, kituhthn, ka-papayit mustuswah, . 

igih Ah-kiskdyihlohk ane witsohkdteahk kiviwdkh dh-aydyt, “haw, ohih 
abanieih kabkiyow to-wthyoskittakdwd 1? dtavdw wisahkidteahpe 

a Weulouakk, iyhloh-pimwttsih mustuswah, pikuhtiniyiwa ; no- 
muys Kih-nipahaw, yiyisk ptkiskwityiwa mustuswa, 

" maskumalin whsohkiiteihk utima l” ith. 

(  piyis mistinam abeusisah, dkuyikuhk pll-Kiwiw pdyakukil. dkwoh 
Ah-Uiha-~pi-kininkantat, h-utkdiwil, Anay kd-Kipiwtpiskamiyit waskahikan, dh- 


‘ 


* 


a Menarini story, in which, however) the mischict-maker is not.the Culture Hero, but 
the rabhit, and “pralriceweeds were his arrows.” Three facta neem relevant, though J do 
not know in whos relation they etiand: (1) the story is not s typienl Culture Hero tale, 
ae ME on the Sew Js which he appears as 4 secondary charncters (2) in general the 
Culture Hero plays 1 more itaportant part in Menomink thought and story than in Cree; 
(4) bie naine in Menormini is menagus: “Big-Habbit,” which may be an adaptation 

A Ofibyts ninalue (Cres, cattern, ninayus), or of some conlicr Menoroini form. 1. 
7"Our elder brother,” part of the deception, since everyone is Wisshketchuhk’s 
nnyys brother or sister, Ah. immediately blow, where he nays ndeim: “my younger 


ee L , ro ‘ P 
The whole motit, beginning whee Oneleg befriends the young woman, oceurs in 


wothuer 


amas 


oe 
< 


328 


nihteipayit aw takwiw, maka pdyak awa mustua dh-wdpiskisit, mina dwaku 
mana dh-pi-nikdnuhlit, dkust dyakunt nama wihkdle uth-nipahdw pdyakukat; 
dnpakw dwa ka-awdgrinskinit mustus iskwiwa bhi wipahwdw, upakwahtdh- 
uniyiw Uicldipiid-kandalewahameyt, aldakanal uhtst, dkua dh-tapasit. kahki+ 
yaw mustuswak tapastoak, hwikthimiwa uitima, aspin dh-ati-maloytt. 

 Akwoh awa wiaahkdisdhk matohkdsiw, tpiskota dh-mawthkatat oh 
aukintkinkwdwn, kul dyjsi-vipwdpahtat; * tka nike-kisiwaha pdyakukat |” 
dh-itdyihtahk, Upiskots th-pimitisahwat bh iskwiwa, maka dh-tapasit, hi 
pllyakukdtah th-tapasthat. 

bkeoah plyokukat dkutah aydw. mistahi mihiatiw usima. dyikuhk th- 
pont-qkiskat wima, dkuytkuhk usthidw waskahikan, dh-ispayik, dh- 
misdyik. dkuyikuhk dh-kinhtal, dkwah alsusisah usthtaw ; piyis mihtedt 
tkaskinkyiwna upthtutwina. ' 

dhuythuhk dkwah, “ mahtih ntsim nka-pimitisahwdw,” dkwah itdyih- 
lam, Hkasah dh-sipwihtdl, dh-mitihtat mustuswa, 

Ate kayds th-kih-pimubtdyil, maka miyu-mitihidw. kitahtawd, wahyaw 
dkw dh-aydl, kitahtawd kd-wipahtahk sdkuhikan th-misikamdyik. pot oma 
kih-mintstikouiyiw, dkutah ké-mihtadtiyit mustuswoh. d-kitipamdt, ka- 

‘ whpimal Ohi brrwdpiskisiyit mustuswa, kAsow, piyisk utthtam sikahikan, * 
sinund edkahikanthk dh-pimisihk, . 

“him, oma kauthpititaman t-Gti-miskwamtwiw 1” iow, 

ma niply potitam : Apthtaw isku miskwamiuiyiw., kthtwdm potitam ; 
dkanah daumakimil-miskwaminiyiw. ; 

Kipipayihow, “ nka-uth-dpakussiwin 1” dhitwilt, : 

Akuyt, sipwdpayiw, miskwamthk dh-pimipayit. gihkuhow, dkuai dkwah 
pasikiw. ihwoh wah manah d-ndh-ntawi-minihkwiyit pistskiwa, dkutd 
kqsiw, sakihh dh-po-pimisihk, “mdskota pd-kwipikdtsih nisim,” dh- 
itdyihtahk, dkwah dvih-kakwd-wadpamat witma, kitahtawl kd-wdpamat 
Ohih kA-wipiskistyit mustuswa, toh dh-itiskwdpiyit, dkutah dh-apiyit usima, 
mitunt dh-kanwwdyimimiht usa. dkwah bustiw ta-kih-<ttuhidt, © tne: 
dtukd nku-kth-ini-kisiwahk-usdpamak 7” dhatdyihtahk, 

dkutoh th-pa-piminihk, kitahtawl ka-pid-takusiniytt sihkusa, 
omis tw: © dstam 1” itdw, ; 
~ takubldyiwn, 
"ind hk 7 ~~... ‘ 
“ hdw, oki tt mane mustuswak kisiwak koy-blihtawalk 7” 
“ahd” . 7 
“haw, uitethin, dkdya uihlamaw awtyak Glah ah-aydyan, kaskih- 
ayant, nisim lu-uiihtamawal tah té-pdy-ituhtal, ”' itdw, 
“ha hi hh ha hal” itodyiww; “dyiman | mistahi kanawdyimaw 
kisim. dkusi kwatakdyimow kisim,” itik ; © dyiwih mahtith | mak ani 
pukwitam wiki auiya t-dtuhidyit,” atk, : 
. » Ghust signwihidyiwa, kuntah tathstawdyiyihk,,mustuaunadhk dh-papd- 
mipuyit aon sthkus, dh-uth-kakwd-utihtt oh iskwiwa. piyia tik dh-ayat 
Asay wipamik Ghi wagriaki-mustusah, dkust dh-at-ituhtéyit, tapasiw, dkwah 
tuhtdw chi pityaleukatah. : : a 
Omisth itdw> “ Ayiman. nama nikiw-utihtaw kisim. nistah nikuatiw 
wipiski-mustus,” itwityiwa; “ mayaw chwipamit, dsay nipd-nalik, ” 
tik ; “ dyiman ani {" itik. 


— 


324 

dkus thatéhtdyiwa, sdkwah ay-aydw dkutah, kitahtawd dkutah ka- 
pi-twihuyil ledhkayowa,’ » 
x “dstam 1" itdw. 

piyatuhidyiwa, . 

“ 6mah kd-papd-mana-uisdhkawataik pisiakiwak, mitunt tt kinukay- 
dskawawak ?” 

“adhd | ahpéh mana wawikaniwahk tiwihiwak, dskaw ustikwaniwahk 
mind," tldw, - 

“maka awa wipiskt-mustua, askaw ist min dyako kisiwak kusdpamdw ?” 

“dha | dskaw ustikwanthk uldskanthk mtwihéwan. namuya mana 
pakwitam, " itik. me 

haw, kitimdkdyimin | witethin 1 nivtm ana kimota kakwd-wthtamaw 
Gtah dh-aydydn. ndntaw tat ta-kakwd-kwapikdw," tldw. 

dkusi, ' dha’ ; nka-wthtamawdw," itdw. 

ha, dhust aspin dw-Ghpihéyit, kuntah mdkwa mustusundhk papah-ta- 
twithéw awa taktaahkayow, piytak wipamdw dh-apiytt ahi. wh piski-mustus- 
wah, dkutah mina oh dakinikiakeudwa dh-apiyit, dkutah tstki ntawi-twdhow, 
kuntah “d-papdh-taatsahkatahikdmt. yryisk wawikaniythk twithiw bhi 
wapiatiemustunwah, kilahtawd utdskantythk dkwah todhiw, ka-kitdpamdw 
awa an unkinikiskudw, chewawtyaldyimal, “ Upwd namuya kustam kik- 
way 1” dheitdyimal, dh-kih-kilsiyit, kituhtawd keGhypipayihuyil, unstike 
wanthk dh-twihuyit aw uskinikiskwiw, namuya pisiekdyindw, ch-wawiy- 
aldyimidl, kilahtawd wihtimanihkh twdhuyiwa. a 

émis tik: “ dkdyo ka-vitkimitin, dh-kitusitan,” itik, uhtawukahk ah- 
iiskwdyiyit ; “kiss takusin, ‘ntawi-wihlamaw,’ dy-astt. Olah kwipik- 
dskanthk pimisin ; ‘ lo-kakwil-pd-kwapikdw 1? Jeitik.” 

“ tapod tt? dheldpwdyan i??? itdw. © 

“dha.” 
Gh, dust uhpihdyiw., dkuah Ghpihdt awah, dkuyikuhk pikupayiw ana 
muslus, 2, 
Gis tlw aw iskwdw: “hdw, nka-ntawieminihkwin, ninbhidydpak- 
wan,” itdw, . . 

"6, numuya t kutak awiyak la-ndtam, ta-minihkwdyin, ” itdw, 

“namuya 1 ubtsitaw d-nbhidentawi-minihkwdydn, usm nindstusin, 
piyakwanuhk tuhkih dheapiydn,” itaw; “ piyis niskdlah nivth-wisakdyih- 
tin, niku-sintwuhldn, itd, : 

“aha. kiyipa kakwd-lakuhla ; Akagi min dwiyak witadw,” itdw, dhe 
pukudlahk kutakah napdwah ta-kilélikuyit oh takwiwah awa mustunge | 

“ dha’ ,” itwiw aw tnkwhw, theati-pasikdt, dh-wipwdhld >» 4. 

lapwi dh-utihtahk edkahikan, “ detam, nisim 1" Iedtifeut afeddeneel ; 

heuti hl, “namuya teiy dwiyak kiviwih aydw ¢" itik. pgs ee 

dha’. : a 

“Gd, nisim, dhepi-ndtitdn bma," itiw, dh-ulsdmal.aw Uskwiw ustdiah, 

dkust mina pétilam bma skakikan: dpihtaw iskuk miskwamtuncyiw. 
mina dh-pildtahk, dkwah akdmihk iskuh, . 

“haw, nisim, kawipayihuh,” itdw }- “ nka-uwth-dyukustsiwindn. " 

dkwah miskwamthk pimipayiwak, kdkats dh-ktst-pihkuhutsik, dkuyi- 
kuhk ati-tihkiguyiwa oho miskwamiyah, piyisk Gta wiyah” pihkuhowak, 
dkwah dh-lapasitsik. ; 

dkuyikuhk dkwah wapamikuk, “ haydhay | pdyakukat usima kwdeihdw | 
nawaswitdhk 1" ka-matwih-itwihyit mustuewah, mo, 


’ 


“ 


~ 8 


Bab 

dkust dkwah sbhkih piri 3 usima, Keilahtawd waihyaw dh- 
aydtsik, dkwah wih-atimikWak, usdm nawats d-yikitsikawit aw takwdw. 

“4, nistm, kitakuhp wdpinah |" itdw. 

wipinum, dwakuh dy-utihtahkik oki mustuswak, kuntah dh-kitutsik, d- 
nohkwitahkik, 4, dkuytkuhk wahyaw ihtdwok. dyikuhk ah-mdniaiahab bi 
um akuhp, dkuyikuhk mina nawaswidwak bkt mustuswak. Ot 

mina d-wth-atimikut, “hd, nisim, dkwah kanakwayak wipin 1” 

wipindw wanakwayah, Gsay mina dyakunth kunt dh-kitutatk, d-nohke . 
waldlsik wanakwayah. -ityikuhk mina dh-kitamuwdlsik, dkuyikuhk mina 
‘ sipwdpayiwak. 

dyikuh mina d-with-atimikutsik, “nisim, dhwah mina kimaskiainah - 
_ whpinah 1” 

- min dyakunt dh-wdpinahk, utamiyiwak mustuawak, i-nohhwdtahki. 
dyiwihk mana wahyawds ilamiwak. dkwah mina dh-mdstdtahahkik ahi 
maskisinah, dkwah mina pimitisahwdwak mina, dh-wih-atimikutsik, mina 
uldsah wdpinam, min dyakunt ulamiwiyiwa. dkwah min. dyakuni th- 
kitdyit, Gt dhwah kisiwdk aydwak mina. 

mwdhisy dkwah mina d-wth-atimikutstk, “ d, nivim, dkwah kipakwah- 

tdhun wipinah 1” itdw, 
_ min dyaké waipinam, wawis dunks kiytpah kitdyiwa, kiyipah dkwoh 
uih-atimikwak: 

dkwah kisiwak dkwah wikiwdw dh-aydyik, ha, nmisim, dyiwihk mahtih 
dkwah kiskutdkay wapinah 1" itdw, 

wipinam aw Gakinikiskwdw. dyuku mina mayaw dh-utihtahkik oki 
mustuswal, dyuku mina ulamiyiwak, dkuytkuhk dkwah mitunt tik dkwah 
aydwak wikiuahli.” dyikuhk dh-kititeik, dkiyikuhk mina sipwdpayiwak. 
dkuyikuhk dkwah utihtam wikiwdw. Kthtsdkustwdpindw usima ; adkwah 
wiya wistah kihtsdhusipaythow. deay dkutah takupaytwah., kdkdts kdniakdk, 
lytkuhk dh-askékutstk, dkwah dh-utinahk wtpiatsah, dkwah dh-notsthdt bla 
mustuswah, miydatinahki, kutakeah dh-utindt upihtatwana, piytak mitun 
iskwahiw mustuswah, nama mayaw kih-nipahdw ahi ka-wapiskiatyit 
mustuawah, kitahtawd dkwah ki-~pikwastahwdl, tapiskote dkwah mistahi 
d-muakawistytt, 

6mis itik : ' pdyakukdl, kisdkdleihin. apihta-kisikahk pdy-iei-hawiw- 
dpinin. nikdn Gd apisiyiniwak titahpikiwab ‘ Gpihtd-keaikahk wapiakt- 
mustur dy-dtaskdt nikitimdkdyimih, ? ttwdlat, ta-tipwdw,” itth. 

“ hd, wapiski-mustus, isi-kawipaythuh 1? ctw. 

lagrwd dleutd isi-kawipaythuyiwa, 

“yahoh, ponihihk piyakulkdt kika-mdsterhikunaw, piytsk sdaay 
kokimadminuwa sakotsihdw 1” iwhyiwa ; “ ponihihke hb! — - 

ldpwd naniings AC i ene a dkwah whtakustwak usima, 

dkwah Ch-pustayswiniadyit’ usima, ‘ mitunt -mandpatsihuh, nisim 
itdw. 
lipwi nanapdlsihow. 
mituns dh-Kisi-wawdell, “hdw, wayawitan, nisim 1” idw, d-kth-waya 
witstk, ' d, nisim, namuy ds Oni kinwilak éh-kih-miyu-witsdtan. uadim lahkih 
nka-mukuskatsihikawin hiy ohtst. piyisk ka-misi-wandlethik awiyak. 
usdm kikitimakdyimitn(’ tadskwah ayteiyiniwak kd~wih-thldtetk itah askthk, 
blah araceaerl re pih-piyak aytsiyiniw kika-kitimakayi- 
miw, oki tedekwah kd-wth-bhpiki tsik ayieryiniwak, dkwah niya pahkisims- 


Laan, 


Tose be! 326 


Ghk nik-6taskin. ayistyintw. kthkihk pdyak, ‘ nikitimdkdyimik éh-pdy- 
akukdtat (’ ttwdtst, ta-ladpwiw. ha, nsim, pdskis dkutah ohtst d-wih-kana- 
wayimitan,” iUdw; “niyd, nisim, sipwihtd |!” itdw, wist d-sipwahtat, 
nisoyak a&h-niaw-Glaskitsik. _ . ‘ 

dkuyikuhk ch-iskwak dtayohkdwin. 


The two had a small tipi, and all the time they walked about, looking 
for things to eat, and never saw any people. They wished fo see people. 
' “Tf by any chance we see a man, we shall marry him, that he may 
kill things for us to eat,’’ said the elder sister; ‘Do not then reject him. 
Rather let us marry @ man, no matter how ugly,” said the elder sister. 


“Yes,” said the younger. | . 

There they stayed on. - boy a 

Then at one time, after dark, as they were ahout. to sleep, when the 
elder sister looked at-the stars, one looked bright,-and another was small 
and did not shine brightly. hyo 

Thus spoke the eldér sister: ‘Oh, little sister, would we might have. 
them for husbands, yon stars! Would I might have as husband that one 
that shines so brightly, and you the smaller one,” she said to the other, 

“Yes,” answered she. ‘ 


What she.thought was, “The one that shines brightly: is handsome.” 
ok * 0 * a ae * 
- She got up and built the fire. 
“Little aister, get up!”’ she called to her. 


CU * * * * _* _. The elder sister 
pointed out: her ‘husband-to-the. younger, smiling all the while with glad- 
ness at having a husband...Then she cooked; they bad only berries to eat. 
Then the younger sister’s husband got up: he turned out to be a handsome 
young man. Oh, she was glad, that woman. Then, after a bit, when the 
elder one’s husband got up, he turned out to be a very old man with white 
hair; She did not like his being old. So then they stayed there. The men 
sat there all day. Only at nightfall they left the house and went away. 
When daybreak was néar, they came back. Then they went to bed.’ In. 


. the morning, when they had eaten, the elder sister and the younger would | 


always go tramping about, looking for berries and for wild turnips, for 
these were all they had to eat; but never did their husbands hunt. Then 
at one time, when they had been there quite a while, the elder sister did © 
not recognize the land. It seemed to her as if she had never seen the land 
where they were, She was sad, and she disliked having tor husband, as it 
turned out, an old man.. Then she kept wandering about. And she was 


_~#ad because there were no other people there where they dwelt; this it was 


~~ made her sad. Then at one time, when as usual. they were wandering 
about, digging wild turnips here and there, they. saw a lodge of old leather. 


“Little sister, now let us visit!” she said to her. 


When, accordingly, they went there, when they arrived, there was an 
old woman. 


“My grandchildren, my grandchildren!” she said. 
They went in. . They gave her. wild turnips to eat. 


- 327 


“Dear me, you really please me much, my grandchildren! For a ‘long 
while I have been hankering for these, ever since I heard that you were 
brought here, you of whom they say, ‘They are always getting wild 
turnips.’ ”’ 

“Grandmother, is it true, that we have been brought here?” she asked 


her 
Saaeenaie TE she ‘told her}. “Grandchild, do you really think, ‘We are on our 
earth?’ ” 

“Yes. 3? 

“By no means, my y grandchild! It is up aloft that you aré, and from - 
yon place below that you were conveyed,’{, she told her; “Grandchild, do 
you think, “They are mortal men whom we have as husbands?” 

es 

“Not they. When you of mortal race say, ‘Stars,’ of that kind is he. 
Did you not say, ‘The one that shines bright let me have for my husband’? 
That old man you now have for your husband. And, ‘That one that does — 
not shine so clear may you have for your husband, ’ you said’ to your ° 
younger sister; that is why she has that youth for her ‘mate’ she told her. 

“Alas, grandmother, can you help us to get back homie? We are 
pining for our. earth,” she told her..: 

. “Yes, my grandchild; but indeed you were foolish to’ Avant a star for 
your husband,” she told her; ‘Well then, -grandchild,- look for a wild 
turnip. The wild turnip which grows out from where thé buffalo dung lies, 
that one you will pull up. That is where this land dg pierced,” she told 
her: “When you find it, come and tell me.” . - , 

‘ ‘Yes, ) 

- They went out of the lodge. and looked for’ 4b, They soon found it, 
So then they went and told their grandmother,’ 

“We have found it,” she told her. 5 

Then ghe took the little thong with which her braid was s tied. 

“Now then, tie this to a tree. By means of this you will get away 
and reach your ‘destination. Make a nest in which you will sit. When. 
you have finished it, and are ready to descend, you yourself will wrap . 
your head. You will not look about to'see things until you reach your earth. 
Only your younger sister here will look. Then, when you arrive down there, 


‘Grandmother, here is the thong of your braid!’ you will call, my grand-v. ° 


child,” she told them: “Well then, be off!” 
They went out of the lodge to the place where the land was pierced, 
and made the nest. When they had finished it, they tied it.to a tree with 
: that little rawhide thong, and got into the nest, and descended, letting 
_ themselves down on the string. The elder sister ‘wrapped up her ‘head as 
_ they swung down. 
Presently, “Little sister, how is it? Do you not yet gee our earth?” 
“Nol Not yet!’ she told her. ; 
Presently she saw it. : 
_ Then that young woman, “Little sister, do you not yet see it?” 


“Yes, now _ 
“Splendid! Now we shall come back to our earth, little sister! 
let. me look!” 
. “Don’t! Our grandmother told us, ‘Only when you have reached 
your earth will you look,’ she told you,’’ said she to her elder sister." — 


328 

All the time they were going down she kept questioning her younger 
sister about their earth. ; ° 

“We are alrnost there now! The trees appear plainly now,” she told 
er, “¢ . 
“Little sister, do Jet me look!" she asked her. - 
“Do not! We are near now!” her younger sister told her, but still she 
Jonged to take 4 look. Although her younger sister held the covering 
round her head, suddenly she threw off the cover and looked. The string 
broke by which they were tied. Down they went. The nest’ caught on a 
tall tree and hung there. ; a , 

“Really, you are foolish, big sister, not to heed what our. grandmother | 
told us!” she said to her elder sister. 


Oh, they were glad to see their earth. But they could not get there; 
they hung there aloft, Presently they saw a wolf who was running that 
“4 y. , fe . - s - ", 

“Oh, little sister, E shall fool the wolf; he will get us down,” she said 
to the other. _ ; wl 

Vey,” 

When he came near, she said to him, Wolf!” and when he looked at, 
her, “Get us down. Take us down from, where we are caught. We ure 
even willing 40 marry. you, if you like.” ; fe 

. “Yoho!t. [ am not a good climber. Also, you would be a bother to 
ine; I-never stay in one place, but travel about all the time,” said he. 

“Faugh! Do you suppose we would really marry you, ugly as you arc, 
and long-faced, and a-¢lutton, who, whenever you kill anything, eat it all 
hy yourself?” she told him, reviling him. 

And:so there they stayed. Presently they saw another who came | 
running thut way. He turned out to be a lynx, . 

“Oh, little sister, let us fool this one! The like of him are good climbers. 
—Hey there!’ ashe walked by, “Hey, hey, lynx!” . 

“What is it7?! . a 

“Get us ‘down from here! We will even marry you, if you like; we 
cannot get down!” 

“Yoho! Lam not a good dimber, Look here at my paws: I haven't 
any nails,” said he. : ° 

“Ho ho, do you suppose we would marry you in any case, you ugly 
‘fellow, with your crumpled-up snout and your big feet and your flat ramp?” 

She gave up the chances of him, Bo he left them. Oh, they were sad, 
; because they wanted to get down’to earth. Finally they had been there 
4 Jong, tine. Presently they saw still another come running that way. 

. “Little ‘sister, now I shall: cheat this one. This one will be eager to 
take wives,” she said to the other. : 

"Yes," ; 

As he came running close by there, “Hey, hey!” . 

Ve looked up. oo 

__ “Wolverine; you are a good climber. Get us down from here. . We are 
frightened and do not know how te-get down. We are even willing, if you 
rescue us, Lo marry you,” she told him. ee 
“Hoho, you mean to fool me!” gaid he.’ 

“No! Heally, we will marry you,” she told him. 
“Very well then!”: * os 


’ 
1 
e - 


4 . 4 7 


oe 


329 , Os 


So he came climbing up. 
When he had reached them, “Me first!” said the elder 8 sister, . 
“No! ‘Wait; first’ comes your sister.” - 
“Very well,’ 7 

’ Then he took her. on-his hack. . 
“Now then, do not rub yourself- directly against my robe. I think a 


4 
oo: 


great deal of my robe,” he told the young-woman. 


The young woman wrapped herself very carefully in her clothes, and 


he climbed down with her. At last he had got. her down. . Then, befo 


doing any more, the wolverine rolled himself over and over, like. this, to 
wipe his robe clean where the woman had.come into contact with it. 
Then that elder sister thought, “When he takes mé down, I will dirty 
up his robe, the conceited fellow!’ she thought of him. 
Then he came up again. a 
When he had reached her, “Now then, sit carefully wrapped | in your . 
clothes. I think very highly of my robe,” he said. _ 
“Then he took her on his back. ‘s ; 
And as he climbed down, because he went slowly and carefully, “Hurry 
up, wolverine! I am miserable with longing to: a foot on my earth,” 
said the woman, : 
* * + * ee # He rolled over and flung himself down ~ 
to the ground, 
“Tt is horrible, what-you are doing to my rabel i “Did LT not tell you that 
I valued my handsome robe!” he eried. 
As the woman fell, she broke her leg. just above the knee. 


As the wolverine started to go away, the young woman said to him 


‘ “Oho, wolverine, since you have thus given me.a painful fall, let’ your” 


robe needs forever be marked there * *- as long as there be, - 
an earth!’ she said to him; “‘And Jater, when mortal. men grow into life, 


-». never shall. they eat you; * * * ‘Wolverine,’ 


they. will call you.’ 
Then he went away. 
“Oh, little sister, take me where there 3 is plenty of firewood, ” she said 


“to the. other, 


So then her sister dragged her on her blanket-robe, taking her to a 
place where there was plenty of firewood. Then she made a lodge for them — 
out of leaves, and then all the time the young woman gathered firewood, to 
keep up a fire for her sister, who was suffering from her leg and- sleeping 
hardly at all; every morning she built a fire. At last she had been sick a 
long time; her wound would not heal. Then at one time, while her younger _ 
sister was gathering firewood, she took a knife and cut off her leg there 


‘where it was broken. The bone stuck far out. She whittled it with the 


knife, shaping it off small. -When the young woman was coming home, she 
heard the sound of her-elder sister chopping away at something. When she 
got near, the other stopped her work and covered it with her robe, to hide 
it, She could not see what her elder sister had been, doing. 

' But what the elder sister thought : was this: “ * * rr ee 


she thought. - 
Then presently, as the young woman continued to gather faggots, 


. presently she suspected her elder sister, because she always stared at her , 


with an unceasing smile}! Presently, as she was gathering wood, a tomtit 
came and alighted there and there. 


. OS 


. , B80 


“Qh, woman; I want to tell‘you this!) * * * * * “# * * # * | 
She will kill you. Run away!” it told her. » 
She was frightened by these its words. 
“But where can I go now?” . | 
“Off here, toward the north,” it told her. 
“Veg, Oo * - 
‘Then she- took: off her sleeves. —— 
. “Now, my..sleeves, gather faggots! When you hear my elder sister ~ 
. ealling-to you, tell her, ‘Wait a bit! Tell her, ‘I am just getting wood.’ 
If she says to you; ‘Hurry!’ then,-‘Wait a bit! I want to split a lot of it 
first, so that I can bring it without delay,’ do you tell her.” 
' ~ Accordingly, those sléeves.then gathered wood. The.woman fied, 
Presently, “Little sister!’ came the other’s call; “Stop gathering 
firewood!” _ a - 
Then, “Wait a bit!” said those things, —- - 
. “Be quick!” she was heard to call, and presently, “My spouse!” she 
~ eried; “Come back home!’ Iam getting sad, my spouse, because you- are. 
£0 long about coming home,” she said. Lt 


s 


Oh, but as for her, she fled. on 

Then. at: last elder sister grew tired of éalling, “Come home, my 
spouse!’ ° . : . 

“Wait a bit!” 

“Vah a : 


Presently, “You will anger me, my spouse! Come home!” «. 
. “Wait a bit! I first want to get some faggots.” , 
: At last thewoman arose and looked for her sister. : 
» “You actually pay no heed at all! Now I am going to club you, my 
spouse! You are taking too long about coming home!” ‘ , 
Then, using her one leg, she went to where hér sister had been gather- 
ing wood, and when she got near, the other ceased chopping wood, and 
\ then, in another grove, again the other was noisily chopping and making a 
an din at the gathering of firewood. 
\. “She keeps right on getting wood, when I call and call to her! Now 
“. you have made me angry! When I reach you, I shall club you, my spouse!” 
\__ she said to her sister. aa ; ne 
‘. .j . But when she got there, presently she saw the sleeves that were 
uN gathering wood, Then those sleeves fell to the ground. | . 


“Oho, truly my spouse has angered me by running away! Wher:ver 


I overtake you, I will kill you, my spouse!” she said to her, and began 
y _ seeking her. : 
Presently she found her tracks and began to trail her. "es 


“In any case there will be no distance great-enough for you to flee!” 
she called to her sister. os 
Oh, she was swift, even though she had’ only one leg. Presently, as 
that woman fled, and her elder sister came nearer and nearer, “Alas! 
Where ig that grandfather of mine who once was here!’’ she eried. “_ 
a the direction in which she was running, a bear appeared in the 
pa 


‘il “Alas, grandfather, try to save my life! My élder sister means to 
me. a 


331 | 


“Dear me, dear me, dear me, my grandchild, I too am afraid of your 
sister! Of manitou nature is your sister. At any rate,: flee Straight ahead. 
_in this direction,” . 
pe reoordingly, the woman fled. Oh, quickly that woman came, into * 
sight 


. “Fie, my spouse has come down to depending on this creature!” she. 


cried, when she came to him; ‘Bear, where is.my spouse?” 

“T do not know where she is!” he told her. 

“Are you not hiding my spouse?: Quick, telk me!” 

“T donot know anything about her.” me 

“Quick. No doubt you are hiding her from me. I am ready to kill, 
you. 

The bear was getting into a..Tage, “put he could do nothing. With her 
cut-off leg she -kicked. the bear; ‘She killed him. She kept up the search 
in that place. Again she found her sister’s track; again she set out on her 
trail, and presently-again she was cloge upon the other's heels. 

“Alas, where is my grandfather who once was here!’’ she said to one, 
and he turned out: to be a Great Lynx. . 

And when that person arrived there, ‘‘Ha, my spouse has come down . 
to placing vain hope even in-this creature!’’ she cried to him, weary; as. she . 
arrived; “Great Lynx, where is my spouse?” 

“Why, where can she be?” é 

“Surely you are hiding her from me! Quick, tell me where you are: 
hiding my wife. I am quite ready to kill you!”’ 

“I know nothing about her.” ; 

“Quick, I tell you! Tell.me about my spouse! 

Before he could speak to her, she had already kicked him; she killed 
’ him.” For it was just as if she had shot him, so powerful was that elder 
sister's leg. And when she had killed him, then again she looked for where 
her sister had gone. Again she found her trail, and again she tracked her. 
And presently again she was following close upon her. 

‘Presently she ‘cried, “‘Alas, where is my grandfather?” 

There, as she went yunning round a bend, she beheld a Great Serpent. 
ge Now, my grandchild, at any rate, flee ‘along here! But truly I do 

your elder sister; she is of manitou nature,” he\told her. 

“Alas, my grandfather, try to kill her!., That elder sister of mine 
means to slay me!’’ she told-him. 

She fled. Presently she came running into sight. . 

“Ha, even in this creature my spouse places hope!’ 

Where the other was, she stopped in her course. 

“Great Serpent, where is my spouse?” 

“Ha, I know nothing about her.’ 

“Tell me! You are hiding her from me, and I am going to kick you! 
YH kill youl”. 

As soon as “the, other budged, she kicked ,nim; in the end she killed 
him. Thereupor again she sought her sister. Presently she saw where 
she had passed in flight. Then again she followed her trail. Now there 
was nothing in which that young woman could place hope. Presently, as . 
she ran on and on, she saw-a.frozen lake and a man at the centre of it. She 
ran toward him. When shéteached him, why, he was one-legged, and 
was 6 carrying a huge stone; and pounding the ice to make holes in it. 


“oR 


yr” 


e 


% A ‘ 
uM . ~ 


332 


“Alaa, grandfather mine, try to save me; my sister means to kill me! 
If you gave my life, I am willing to marry you,” she said to him. 

He did not even look at her; he did not speak: to her. 

“Alas, alas, if you like, I will even take you as my father, if you save 
my life!”’ 

y He would not even glance at her. She was in distress, for her sister was 

now coming near. 

“Alas, quickly try to save me, for a manitou means to kill me!” 

Only then did he look at her. 

“That is no manitou. That is your elder sister,” he told her. 

“Yes; but she means to kill me! Try to save my life. I am even | 
willing to take you as my elder brother,” she told him. 

“Vogl” 

Now that One-Leg wags pleased. 

“Here,” he told her, “run along here!’ 


So she went along there, passing through between his Jegs. 

“Keep walking along that little path there. When you reach the main 
trail on the shore, you will see a little wooden house. When you reach it, 
then do you enter it, my little sister,” He told her now. 

Oh, the young woman was glad. And #0 away she ran. For even 
now she saw her elder sister approaching. Really, when on her way she 
came to the shore where were those woods, and came upon the trail, she 
stv a little wooden house, a very good one. She entered it. 

That other one,came to her fellow one-leg. 

“One-Leg, where is my spouse?” 

_ As though she had said nothing at all to him, he kept on breaking the 
ice. ; 

“It is to you 1 am saying this, One-Leg! Truly he does not even mean 
to look at me! Where is my spouse? It is you I am asking this! I am 
ready to kill you, since you do not care to talk to me!” she told him. 

He kept on pounding away, while she spoke to him in all manner of 
ways, thinking, “I will make him tell me.” : 

Presently, “Oho, the noise this person makes! She is not your spouse; 
she is.your sister! You are not a man; you are a woman, who go saying, 
‘my wife’! 

“No!” eried that woman; “Quickly now tell me: where is my spouse? 
Where has she gone from here?” 

“Right here,” he said to her. 

“Where?” 

“Right here,” he told her. 

“But where, One-Leg? Quick, tell me!” 


_ When she made to go under between his legs, he dropped the stone 
which he was carrying. I fell on her and cut her straight through at the 
* middle; ‘it killed her, : 

The man went right on pounding. Presently at last he remembered 
that woman; he went home, When he arrived.at his little wooden house, 
there sat his little sister. But there was nothing for her to eat. Sho saw a 
great many quivers hanging there. One-Leg stayed there. “ 

“Ho, here I am sitting like this, and have not given my little sister‘ 
anything to eat!” he said, and took a little flute, and burned incense under 
it, and opened the door. When he played on the flute, quickly the buffalo 


333 


came running. He shot them with arrows. When he had used up one of 
his quivers, he ceased. All the buffalo ran away. 

“Now, little sister, go take.up all my arrows,” he told her. 

So the young woman went out and took up the arrows. 

Then, “Now, little sister, take all their tongues, but nothing more,” 
he told hig sister, and so the woman, taking a knife, went and cut only 
the tongues; she took them all and came in, and cooked the tongues, pre- 
paring a meal, 

But when the young woman went, out to get fuel, none at all lay there 
of the many beasts her brother had killed. She was amazed, for they had 
killed many buffalo. When, then, they had eaten, the man took some black 
stroud and gave it to his little sister. - 

“There, little sister, make clothes for yourself,” he told her; “I am 

\ always working at the ice, making holes. Do you never—for at some time 
someone will come here, little sister—do you never open the door for any- 
one, when you are alone,” he told her. 

So then that young woman kept sewing for herself, and then dressed 
in good clothes and decked herself out. Then she was handsome. When- 
ever One-Leg came home, he was glad, because his sister had already done 
the cooking. Therefore, he became very fond of his sister. She never 
had to fetch anything out of doors, even though he was one-legged. 

Whenever they had eaten up the tongues, “Now, little sister, deck 
yourself out; put on your finery,” he would tell her; and, when she had 
put on her finery, and he had burned incense under his flute, “Now climb 
up on the roof of the house,’”’ he would tell her; “Sound the flute,” he would 
tell her; “When the buffalo come, then only after all of them have gone 
away, after they have fled, only then you are to climb down,” he told his 
little sister, 

Then he held his flute in the incense smoke. The young woman 
climbed aloft. Then, when One-Leg had opened the door, she blew the 
flute, and the buffalo came running, circling round their dwelling. Then, 
when One-Leg made war on them, and after they had fled, then the young 
woman. climbed down. 

After hanging up the little flute, “Now, sister, go take up my arrows,” 
he told her, 

“She went out and took up the arrows. 
When she had brought them in, “Take nothing but tongues, little 
. ister; but not the meat. Whenever I kill game, you-shall have only the 
tongues for your food, 40 highly do-T esteem you, little sister,” he said to 
her; “When you were in piteous straits, ‘Let me befriend my little sister!’ 
was my thought,” he told her, ae 

Accordingly, she went and took only the tongues. So there “they . 
. dwelt. oe 

“Little sister, never go out of doors. Fven though you see somebody, 
even though somebody comes here, you are not to go out of doors. There 
are many persons of evil ways of life,” he told her, 

“Venu,” 

Bo daily all day long the woman stayed alone, while One-Leg always 
went to chop holes ‘out on the ice. And, just before nightfall, when One- 
Leg came home, he rejoiced that his sister always had the meal cooked 


83186—22 


fs 
1 


334 


-and in readiness at his coming. He took loving care of her, asking her 


only whether they had used up the tongues, and when they were used up, 
telling her 4o put on her finery. ~ 

Then, always, when she had put on her finery, “Now, climb up again, 
little sister, to play on the flute.” 

Truly, whenever she sounded it, the buffalo came, and circled round 
their house, while One-Leg attacked them. Only when he had used up 


- his arrows did he stop, and then they would run away. Then the young 


woman came down and took up the arrows, and took only the tongues. 
And then always the creatures which he had killed would come back to 
life and go away. 

In this way they dwelt there, and as for One-Leg, he worked every 
day on the-ice. Then at one time One-Leg knew that someone would 
come there. - 

Thus he spoke to his sister: “Little sister, Wisahketchahk will come 
here. Do not open the door to him. It is no good he has in mind. Too 
much it is heard everywhere that :1 take loving care of you: ‘Let an 
attempt be made to have them go to destruction,’ is the thought con- 
cerning us,” he told his sister. 

And so, as all.day long each day he left his sister, presently, when 
she had almost used up the buffalo-tongues and had left only enough 
for one meal, then someone arrived: a man. She did not recognize him as 
Wisahketchahk. 

“Ha, open the door for me, little sister!” he said to her. 

She would not speak to him, though he said all kinds of things to her. 

Then he said to her, “Little sistér, ‘Do you meanwhile go hunt buffalo.’ 
Our little sister will call them. It is almost time for us to go home; and 
there is nothing for us to eat in the morning,’ so spoke our big brother,” 


- he told her. 


Then the young woman gave credence. 
“YT shall fool my little brother now,” he thought, “That One-Leg.” 
Accordingly, she opened the door for Wisahketchahk. He entered. 

__ “Ho, little sister, hurry and deck yourself out. Soon your big brother 
will come upon you and find you laggard, with nothing ready cooked,” he. 
said to her. 

_ “That is so!” thought the young woman, for her big brother was so 
kind to-her. When she was told this, “He bids you so,” it made her give 
credence to him, §o, after climbing to the top of the little house, she blew 
on the flute, and the buffalo came running. 

When Wisahketchahk knew that they were near, “Now let the shafts 
of all these arrows be soft!” said Wisahketchahk. 


Truly, so they were. Although he shot arrows at the buffalo, they 
broke and fell ag they struck; he could not kill the animals. At last the 
buffalo spoke. - ; 

“Let us rob Wisahketchahk of his little sister!” they said of him. 

At last he had used up the arrows. By this time One-Leg was coming 
home, But, though he came walking fast, when he came within sight, 
they had already knocked over the wooden house, so that the woman fell 
to the ground. Now, one of those buffalo, which was white, the one which 
always walked at the head as they came, this one One-Leg never tried to 
kill; and now this same white buffalo tossed the woman on its horns, 


335 


pulling her up by her belt which it had caught on its horns. In this wise 
it fled. All the buffalo fled. His little sister was carried off, weeping afar 
as she disappeared from sight. 

Then that Wisahketchahk pretended to ery, just as if he were lament- 
ing the young woman, and ran off yonder, thinking, “I had better not get 
One-Leg angry at mel!” and acting as if he were going in pursuit of the 
woman, but really making.off in flight, fleeing from One-Leg. 

One-Leg stayed there, He mourned greatly for his little sister. When 
he had passed the extreme of desolation at her absence, he built high 
and great wooden house. He finished it, and then made arrows; ut Inst, 
. he had many quivers all full. 

Then, ‘Let me go in pursuit of my little sister,” he thought, and set 
out, following the trail of the buffalo. 

Although it was a long time since they had passed, yet he trailed: 
them with ease. Presently, when he had gone a long ways, he saw 4 large 
Jake. And there was an island, and on it were many buffalo. When he 
looked at them, he saw the white buffalo. He hid, At last he came to the 
lake, and lay down by the shore of the luke. 

“Now, let that upon which I blow continue to turn into ice!’ he said. 

He blew upon the water: half of the way across it turned into icc. He 
blew on it again: all the way to the other shore it was ice. 

He flung himself on the ground, saying, “Let me turn into a mouse!” 

Then he ran off, running over the ice. He reached the other side. 
There he rose upright. again. Then there where always the boasts went to 
drink, there he hid, lying among the trees, thinking, “Perhaps my little 

_ sister "will come here to fetch water,” for he meant to try and see his little 
sister. Presently he saw the white buffalo-and by its head, as it sat there, 
sat hia little sister, his little sister, ‘Glogely guarded. Then ‘he feared to go 
where she was, and thought, “I wonder how I can manage to see her from 
close by!” 

- Ashe lay there, presently there came a "weasel. 
He gaid to it, “Come here!” ‘ 
~ It came to where he was, , 

“What ia it?” 

“Do you go close up to these buffalo?” 

“eV eg,”! ‘ . faa 

“Then help me. Tell no one that I am here. If you can manage it, 

tell my little sister to come here,” he told it. 

“Dear me, dear me!’ it waid: “That is difficult! Your Jittle sister is 
closely guarded. Unhappy is your sister,” it told him; “But at any rate, 
I will try. But he does not like anyone to come near, * it told him. 

So it set out, that weasel, running about here, there, and everywhere, 
between and under, through the buffalo country, -trying to reach that 
woman. At last, when it had got’ near, already it had been seen by the 
white buffalo. So, when the other came toward it, it fied. Then it went, 
to One-Leg. 

It said to him, Ot j is difficult. I could not reach your little sister. 
I too fear.the white buffalo,” it said; ‘As soon ag it saw me, it came for 
me,” it said to him; “It is a difficult thing!” it said to him. 


83186—224 


a4 


356 

With that it went off. Te stayed on there, Presently a blackbird 
coming and alighted here. 

“Rone here!” he said to it, 

It enmne to him, . ; ; 

“When jn your way you ga about delighting the beasts, have you got 
them nuch used to your prance” 

“Yeu! Teven perch on their backs, and sometimes on their heads,’ 
it told bin, ; 

“put this white buffidlo, do you sometimes ace him too from clove by?” 

"YS ext Bometimes J nettle on bis head and on his horns. He docs not 
mind,” it told him- 

“Then, take pity on me! Udp set Try seeretly to tell my little 
ehies there that Dam here. Lat her try to’eome somewhere to get water,” 
he told it, 

. Then, Yes, E will val) her,” it said to hin, . 

Then up it flew and away, and liere and there in the bufflilo Jand the 
Hackbird would Wight. At laat it saw the white buffalo sitting, and there 
rat the young worn, Sh went and wighted near by, pecking about here 
aod there with ite Jitile beak, At Inst it perched on the white buffalo’s gost 
hack, Then presently it perched on the buffalo’s horn. The young woman” 
kept looking wt it, pleased at ite drollery, and thinking of it, “Truly, its; 
fess solbing!” while it. twittered away. Presently it flew up and perched — 
on the young woman's bead, She paid no attention to it, merely thinking 
it pleasingly drall. Presently it perched on her shoulder, 

Thus it spoke to her: “Leb sae not frighten you by sy spesking * 
to you,” tt sid to her, holding ite head elow: to her ear; “Your brother 
jist come here, and 'Go tell her, he has hidden me. We lies there by the 
path where water in fetched; Wat ber try to came for water!’ he suys to 
you, ‘ 

we it true? Are you spesking trae?” ghe asked it. 

tH, . 

Then it flew up, When it flew up, the buffalo awoke, 

To it the wornan said, “Now I want to.go andl drink, I am thirsty,” 
nha padd to it, ye ‘ ‘e 

"Ob nO! Bomecone elie will fetch your drink,” it aid ta her, 

‘Nol What I want je to go and drink, kam‘ weary of always sittig-— 
in one place,” phe wad to it; “in the end J shall have paing in my legs. 
Lah me stretch my legs by walking « bit,” she said ta it. ‘ 

"Very well. ‘Try to come back soon, und do not go with anyone,” it 

told ber, for that buffale bated any other man to talk to the woman, 


a” 


“Yor,” tid she, and arove wod went off, 
Kaally, nit die one to the Juke, “Come here, my Sittle sisters” her big 
brother said to her, 
. met, the came where he was, In no one near?” he asked her. 
0 
“Now, little winter, 1, is that I have come ta fetch you,” he aaid to her, 
ainhe kined her big brother. , 
Ko tien sain be breathed on the lake: halfway werosa it was ice 
When he blew on it again, then all the way to the far shore. 


“Now then; little sister, tie down on the ground,” he told her; “We 
shall turn inte mice,” 


487 _ 


a 


Then they ran along over the ice, When they had got almost across, 


the ice began to melt. At Jast, however, they got to the shore and made 
off in flight, . 

Put now they were seen by the’ others, and “Ho, ho, ho! One-Leg is 
fuking his sister away! Go after him! they heard the buffalo ery. 

So then he and his sister ran faut. Presently, when they had gone a 
long, ways, the others were near to overtaking them, for the woman was too 
slow on her fect. . ; 

“Obi, Jitthe sister, throw down your blanket-robe!” he said to her, | 

She threw it down, and to it the buffalo came, wildly bellowing and 
licking jt. Meanwhile they got fas abead. Only when they had devoured 
the blanket did the buffalo resume the chase, — 

When again they were close to overtaking them, “Oh, little sister, 


_ how throw away your sleeves!” 


She threw away her sleeves, and again those creatures made a wild 
noive, a4 they snouted at the sleeves, Again, only when they had eaten 
them up, did they start out, 

» When again they bad almost, overtaken them, “Little sister, now 
throw “away your moccasins!” 

When she had cast away these too, the buffalo delayed to lick them. 
Kinch time they did, after all, flee quite a ways, And when they had 
entirely devoured the moceaxins, they chased them again, When they 
were again about to overtake them, she threw off her leggings, Over these 
too the ereatures delayed, When they bad eaten theee too, they were 


already near, ; 
Then, as the creatures were again about to overtake them, “Oh, little 


sinter, now throw your belt! he told her. 

She threw it too, Vhis they deyoured all the more quickly, Very goon 
they were now clove to overtalang them, 

‘Shon, when their dwelling wan already near, “Ob, itd sister, now 
do you throw your dresi!” he told her. 7 

The young wornsn cast it off. Ag soon as the buffalo came to it, over 
it, too, they delayed, Stut by thia time they were very near to their house. 
Only when they had eaten up the drees, did they start out again, But by 
this time he had reached their house. Se threw hia little sister to the 


rook, then he too flung himeelf Wp. Already the creatures arrived on the 
Hume time with hin, so closely were” 


mun, They nearly got there at t 
they upon their heelx. Then he took his arrows and made fight upon those 
buffalo, and when be had used them up, he would take another quiver, 
until at Just be killed w great many of those buffalo. We had not yet sue- 
ceeded in killing the white buffalo.. Ssui presently be wounded it, but it 
Heomed to be ms strong a4 ever, 

St said to him, “One-fag, you have defeated me. Come throw me 
toward the place of noon. Off in the future mortal men will grow into life. 
When one suys, She White Buffalo that dwells in the place of noon has 
taken pity on me,’ he will peak true,” it said to him. . 

“Very well, White {uff alo, throw yourself thither!’ he said to it. 

Truly, to that place it flung itvelf. 

“Ha, leave One-Say alone! He will exterminate us, He has now 
defeated our chicftuin!” they cried, “Leave him alone!” 


! 


« 


338 


And #0 in every direction they went away from there, Thon he and 
his sister dogeonded, ; 

Then when his sister had donned her clothes, “Put on your, best 
finery, Vitte sister!’ he told hor, ' )° 

Srily she decked herself out, _ 

When she bad put on all her ornaments? “Come, let us go out of doors, 
little sister!” he said to her. And when they were outside, “Now little 
sister, it appears that J should not Jong be able.to atay happily with you. 
Too much always would J be assailed and troubled for your sake, In the 
end sombone would destroy you. Tam too fond of you. After a time, 
when mortal men come into being here on earth, then there in the place 
of the afternoon sun you will dwell, One and another mortal you will 
pity and befriend, of the mortals who in time are to grow forth, And I 


‘ ahall dwell in the land of dhe sunset. Hin the course of time some mortal 


man syd, “The One-Loegged Hee taken pity on me,’ he will speak the truth, 
My little sister, at the same thine from there I shall guard you,” he tald her; 
“Go, little sister, depart!’ he said to her, a6 he too departed, and they 
wont to dwell in two places, ; 


‘hat. is the end of the sacred story, 


_ (35) The Spirit Stallion 


‘ Mra, Maggie Achenam 
hdowihkashusahk. 


payole iskudw nlauieminahikdw minaskustminah, kdlahtawd wayaht- 


 wthh: dheayal, kubhiyow kéwiyiwah uwitedwdkanah, akwah wanisin. namuya 


akéyihlom bantdh tdtuhtdt. kdtahlawd misatimwa dheudpiakdatylt ka- 
papuhtaytt, lapasiw ; nawannitik ; hunt idly itinahdk., dkwah lin-tahtu 
ipiskiw, nantaw nitdtaht kinikdw notsthtayiwn, , ih dh-atuktahtkul bhi 
misitimun, payakwanuhk dewuh aydwek ; inkodw awa misatimwa undp- 
dmiw, — kitahtamd kutak dhenipiniyik, ulsauduimietw misalatmusinah, 
dhwah mani qriptimuhtiw pikw Ud inkwdw; misateimusiaoh viledwdw, 
murat pamtitndh ayieiyiniwah, tapasw ; mihkawikiur mitunt, (aplakotn mise 
ithe 

hitahtawd, “ kiwd dkwah,” itik undpdmak Ghd misatimwah ; © miftadt 
nlawdsiminak ka-kiuithtahdwak ; kistdeak k-dtuhlamawalath, (’ tldw. 

ifs d h w . 7 . 


_ hw ani d-wayawtl, dkuah duih-kiwit, dkwah Upwihw ; kitiw awa 
misalim ; ukistakduih plluimiw minatimwah, nigh ah-ubtsih-maakiyit ; 
dyakunih hahkiynw th-Ltundhtabamarnat ustdsah. § dlewah dh-ktwdpayit tak- 
wihw, misolsimunisah at-wilsdwiw, dkwah nai takusin. misahkamik 
pilastimudy, dkwoh bhi utsawawimtaah bhi misatyimustoah awiuisah 


mitawikayiwah ; th-Whtapiyiwuh ; tapartw awa misaluimusis. pimiti- 
sahudw iskudw utsawdsimisoh. ; 


_ dyaku mina payak atsimiwin d-kisthtayahk, misatimwah d-kKth-undpdmit 
iskwiw. madmaskils d-kth-ihkihk hayds dyaku mina; ka-pdhpindinaw 


mudstas, 
iT 


A 


“et 


S pimdtiniyin,” ilik. 


339 


A certain woman went to dig wild turnips Presently, when she was 
in a marshy hollow, all her companions went home. Then she got lost. 
She did not know where to go. Then at one time a white horse came 

_ running toward her. She fled; it pursued her: it drove her-all around. 
Then for how many nights? perhaps for ton days it did not cease from the 
pursuit. There where that horse made her go, there they stayed together; 
Cee ee ee ee ee ee 6 Then that woman would walk about 
here and there; the foul went with her. Whenever she saw human beings, 
she fled; she was very fleet, of foot, like a horse. 

Then at one time, “Now do you go home,” her mate, the horse, told 
ber; “Many of my children you will take home with you; you will 
them to your brothers,” he told her. : > 


“Very well,” a 


Now the time came when she went out. of the lodge to go home, Then 
he whooped; a loud call he gave, that horse; with his call he brought a 
great troop of horses that came out of the water; all these she took home 
for her brothers. And when she went home, the foul went along with her. 
Then she arrived yonder. She brought @ great troop of horses. Then her 
childres played with the foal that was her child; they kept trying to ride 
it; the foal ran away. The woman ran in pursuit of her child, 

This is another slory we have finished, of how a woman had a horse 
for her mate, This too is of « strange happening of long ago; we shall 
laugh afterwards, : 


(36) Aladdin 


. Mra, Maggie Achenam 
héiacthhanheusahh. . 
hdlahiawh daah éldnaw demisik. Akwah pityoh awa kitsimdkiatwi- 
mamistaihenis) d-papimuhlal minah Glanihk, kakway d~wih-lalwd-miskahk 
fa-milwil, hdtahtawd dh-kinilt, dh-tigiskdyik, mdkwits dh-ay-apil, kd- 


yihtukdyit miniydsah, Migpiskits ukimaiw dhevihowit 
“nikaenin,' ihik, “ dhepd-ndtildn ;  dhwiyil d-kiskilyihtamdin dh- 


dkw Gh ubkdastyah witpimikuyiwdh ; “gitim,” tik bhi méniydsah, 
“ nikusisinaw ka-pakilinamawin Ut d-wih-ohynkihak 2?” 

“aha ," dtwdw. uO 

mistahi siniydweh miyik, dkust sipwdhtohiw napdsisoh, wohyaw 
itubtdwak misi-wathy ;  dleutdh lakusinwak watethk, dkwah asinty d-~ 
minikitiyit yohidndw. nipiwis dwaka dhutah pihtukdw, mituni wanitipiskd- 

yi ; apisis riké wisaskulsduiyiw. dhkus tot kipahuk ; kipaham. : 

“kahni pila nima, nipdeis, nima whsaskuldnikan [7 

dkwah utinam nipinis, dhwah itubldw takwahidmihk, a 

“ndtdy | muystas ko-pd-wayawin ; nikdn miyin wasaskuldnikan 1” 
iliiw ndpdsieah, ‘ 

 namuyu, ' ihndiw ndpiets ; “usdm ka-kipahun, ” 

dkusi, * kipah pdtdy 1" 


This word here, and moniyfw :.“Tnglishman,” below, probably arc intended merely” 


an “white mnun,” 


lead 


v 


npaw. 


# 


A 


340 \ yo : 
piyis kisiwdsiw méniyds awa. kipahwéw witihk napasisah, dékwah 


mah-matiw napdsis. papdmildtsimiw pikw-ttah watihkanthk. nama kék- 


way wapahtam. . kdtahtawd yaythtitaw utethtsis, ka~pusteipayiyit dhtganisah. 
“ kékway, kd-tipdyimiyan ?”"' ittk oh dhtsanisah? \ 
“ Gh-nohti-~wayawiyan. " \ 
“umistiud : ‘ nikutwasik iskwahtiém, pdskihtépayih !’ itwd, napésis,”. 
tik. ‘4 
dkwah naipdsis, “ nikutwdsik iskwahtém, paskihtdpayih |” 
dkusi yohtépayiyiw. wayawiw ndpésis. wasaskutdnikan pdyak ayaw. 
dkw ahtsanisah tahkih dyakunjh pikiskwatikow? dkwah sipwahtdw, dh- 


. Kiwat. dkwah éh-takusihk wikiwahk, dtsimustawdw ukawiyah. | | 


 Gkwaoh pita kikway; nika-hasthén riwasiskuténikan, ” itéw./ 

~“ dkwah miyik ; kdsiham. \ 7 J 

“ kikway nilawdyihtaman, ké-tipiyimiyan ?” itik mistapéwéh pdyah. 
sékihik, wasiskulénikanthk dy-uhtsi-wayawiyit, /. 

“ niwaskahikan t-dsihtayan éh-miywasik mistahi,” itéw,/ 

“ aha’ ,” ittk. / 

dkwah Gh-nipdtsik, dsay kisihidyiwa, mistah d-miywasiniyik. sakihtam 
wésiskuténikan, . —_ , 

“mké kdkway ndétawdythtamant,: ka-kdsihin uma wasaskutdnikan, 
Gkwah ahtsanis. pikw ia nk-dydn ; itwéyanih adkutéh nik-dyan. nama 
kdkway ka-pwatawthian, ” itik népésis awa. 7 

kdtahtawé jth-ay-apitsik, awa matsi-moniyds pihkwah utinam ; mist- 
sikuwatsisihk asiwaidw. kiskdyihtam, dkut dh-masinahikahk pihkuhk, 
napdsisah dh-pimdtisiyit, dh-aydyit animah kd-mantéwaniyik wasaskuténi- 
kan, dkwah’ wasaskuténikanah mdwatsihtaw dh-miywdsiniyikih ; akwah 
dyakunth sipwihtataw, itah tékusihkih,. ch-mayatahkih . wasaskuténikanch 
d-wih-atéwét, miskuts Gh-miywasiniyik Gh-mdkit,’ piyis, utihiaw napdsisah. 
payakwapiw notukdsiw. , ; 

kakwdlsimdw, “ namuya tsi kakway kitayan wdsaskutinikan éh-mdya- 
tahk: ? miskuls ih-miywasik ka-miyitin. ” - 

dkwah, “ péiyak astéw 6tah ; ka-miyitin,” itéw notukiw. 

dkwah nitunam ; miskam ; miydw. miskuts. miyik Gh-miywasiniyth. 

“ dyuké kd-nitawéyihtaman, ” itéw awa matsi-kimutish. se 

dkwah napdsis awa namuya apiw ; kih-nakatam uwdsaskuténikan kd- 
manitowaniytk. dkwah takusin. kakwétsimdw ukawiyah, “ taniwé animah 
niwdsiskulinikan ? >: sO : 


“ nikusis,’”’ itik, “ dh-miywasik . miskuts kkth-miyikawinanaw, Gh- 


atamikawiyahk dwakow kiwdsaskutdnikan, ” itéw. 
| kisiwasiw népdsis, + . 


“ kikisindisthin. dwakow watihkanihk ka-kih-kwastéwapintt, ka-wayd-, a 


simisk,” itéw ukdwiyah. 
dkwah ‘sipwahiéw napésis. kétahtawd Gh-pa-pmuhtat, ah-tipiskayth, 


‘ 


*In part the genies which are attached to the ring and the lamp are distinet from 

these objects, but in part the informant, more in accord with Cree views, does not dis- 

tinguish them. : 

__ ,’ Verb-form with inanimate actor, although ahisdnis: “ring,” is of animate gender; 

a fact, even an inanimate ndun in such a connexion would ordinarily be used in animate 
4 Meaning ‘‘a rag”—temporary word-avoidance. 


~ 


ft ., . 


a 
ey 


xe . Lo _ a) 


Reg 


_ 841 


; dh-pékupayit, dh-waskawit, “ kikway, ka-tipdyimiyan, éh-ntawdyih- 
taman?” ittk uhtsahtsanisah Gh-ydyivimat: 
“ tanta k-ayat ka-kimutamawit niwdsskulinikan, dkutdh nik-dyan,” 
uaw. . 
“ dha’ ,” itik. 
‘ Gh-nipat, kihtwim Gh-pdkupayit, ‘hisiwak waskdhikan aydyiw. 
dkwah, “ tanisiy dkwah kd-tétaman ?” tayihtam. 
ékwah wapaméw d-sipwihtdyit. dkwah ituhtéw. 
“ dyikus nik-dkutowiwin |” 
kwdskdéméow ; dyikusiwiw ; dkwah ispatséw wdskahikanthk ah-taski- 
payiyit mistikwah, dkutah kaséw. dkwah wapamdéw uskinikiskwdéwih 


Gkutah Gh-aydyit. kapd-tipisk dkutah aydw, ah-pdhat ta-nipdyit. piyis 


ripadw awa kimutisk. adkwah utsdhtsanisah kdsihwéw. 
“ Kikway éh-ntawéyihtaman, ké-tipdyimiyan ?” itik. 


“ awah kd-kih-kimutamawit wdasaskulénikan akamihk bihtsikamthk ka- 


ntawih-pakitinaw. niwasaskuténikan ka-nakatin,” dw. 
“ dha’ ,” tttk. ; 
.dkwah ‘wiyah utinam wasaskutanikan ka-manitowaniyik. 
“ nikinahk nik-Gydn !” itwéw nadpdsis. 
dkutéh awah dkwah minah kakiké pimiwitaw uswdasaskuténikan ; nama 
wihkate nakatam. 
kdtahtawd minah ka-papadmuhtat awa kimutisk, ah-papd-atawakat a- 


soniyawiyikth sakapihkanisah. pihtukdw adkutah napdsisah - uwaskahik-: 


aniythk. notukdsiw péyakwapiw. 

“mdskots Gma aydytki, waéwis mistaht tah-ukimawiw kikusis, 
“ tawaythk 6tah kik-akutan ; ; dkwah k-dstwatan? asiniwi-muah ; k-dsi- 
- watan. dkutah mistahi ta-miyunakwan kiwaskahikaniwaw.” * ; 

. alémaéw notukdsiw. dkusi sipwahtew awa kimutisk. dkwah awah 

‘ takusin napésis. a 

dkwah notukiw, “ nikusis,” itéw, “ ntalawdn umah k-akutak dkutah, 

t-dsiwatdyan asiniwi-mitéh. ” 


ce 


itik 5 


= 


dkwah, népésis miywdyihtam. dkwah Gh-tipiskdytk hdstham wdsaskut- ~ 


dnikan. . 
“kékway dh-ntawéythtaman ?” itik uwdsaskulénikan? 
“uma k-akutaék dok utah k-dsiwaték asiniwi-mitah,” tik. 
kisiwadsiw simak. ; : 
“ kakdts kinipahitin ; nah animah,” itik awa napdsis; “ d-wih- 
kakwd-nipahisk an,” itik.- 
’ Gkust namuya tapwahtawdw. ; 
Kitahtawd. ké-takusiniyit maskihkiw-ayiniwah,  gh-miyustt maskthkiw- 
iyiniw,” itdw. ahkusiw a népdsis. 
' “dydkw.dnah,” itik, “ é-with- kaktnd-nipahisk ; ka-pd-nitawéipamtk ; 
nipahahian, ” ith, ; 
dékwah pdé-ntawipamtk. nipdéwinthk a-piniisihk mahkuman tahkunam. 


lasiwatéw : “he puts it inside” (as into a box or bag), but: we are not told into what. 
Immediately below the word is used in a common specialized meaning, ‘he puts it into 
his bag, bosom-fold, pocket’; farther on, similarly, the corresponding verb with animate 
object, asiwahdw, specializ ed: “ bring (animal) under shelter.” 

2 Either the nouns should be made animate obviative (ending ah), or the preceding 
verb Riven inanimate actor (iikéw). 


‘or. anth ittk ; the sandhi is often carried from a quotation « over to the verbs of 


_ gaying; ildw (transitive), itwdw (intransitive). , 


ye gg 


é kitdhkusin 27 ith. 

“Gha’ ,itdw. * 

ékwah ‘alah. th-pi-nawakiytt, tahkamilao ; ; nipahaw, 

“ “6, ltandhki ¥ maskihkiw-yiniw kinipahdw 1” ittk ukdwiyah. 

‘a, namuya, maskihkiw-tyiniw 1" itéw; “ kimutish anah,". itdw Q 
+ ieunleniqahit dwaké. k-oh-nipahak. ” 

_ dkwah nitunikdwak ; pikw itah utsasiwatsikaniyihk mihkuman mis- 
kamwak, min. tsawisk dh-pimiwitayit, minah pistsipéwin, d-ki-wih~pistsi- 
puhikul awa napdsie. _ 

* dkwah ay-oydw. pélahtawi nipdtipish kd-takusiniyit mitdtaht lapdiwah, 
sosouatimwah dh-nd-nayahtsikdyit: pdyak phiukayiwa, 

“nama, wiya tsi nika-kth-kapdsindn ?” itch. ‘ 

“ “ kapisik ; i; kitimiwdwak asiwahihkuk, ” tldw. 

“ namuya ; dkus ist ta-nipawiwak," 

Gkust sukuhpitawak utémivdwah, dkwah dkutah uskinskiskauitw pamina- 
uasow ; asamiw. dékwah ah-kisi-mitsisowtht, kasihiyakandw. Akwah d- 
nlaui-wdpinihk kasthiydkandpuy, ituhtéw ahi sosowatimwah, ki-péhtahk, 
“€ fisay li?" Gh-atikul, kimdts d-pikisiwdyit. 

‘namuya,’’ tldw ; “ kdkdts,” itéw, 

Ghi sGséwatime ah ké-nayimalsik kimutiskah mahkahkuhk. qihtubd 
dkwah uskinikishwiw, dkwah kisdkamisam nipiy ; mistahi mitunih #. ». 
askihkuhk sikinam, dkwah wayawihtila iw. dkwah yohtdnam mahkahk, 

oS disay 12 atthe, 
ha, itd, 

pahtyi-sakinam nipiy mahkahkuhk ; nipahdw chi kimutiskah. nipahihk- 
aswiw kahkiyaw, dkwah pihtukdw ; Gmatsiwiw dkwah, utdkimdmah dh- 
mlawapirnat, péyak ahi ékutah apiytwah kaydgnts. 

“ ntikimam,” itdw, “ kayds mianak d-nilta -natinikiiyan, " tliw, 

“ hays ia lanes d-kih-lolama fin ha fildiparnindwdaw. nka-wawisin, tapiskots 

_ Eubih-nitinikdydn ; dkust nik-dsihun.” 
“ tapwih'!” iliw awa utdakinikiskwémah. 


dkwah nihtatsiwiw uskinikiskwiw ; nta-wawdyiw. déhwak pad-dmatsi- 
udu. tsaunsk tahkunam dékwah mohkuman., . 

“hays ihust é-kih-isihuyahk, ka-notinikdyahk,” itéw. 

dkwah dhutah pih-pimuhtiv, pikw tsi dh-totahk. kdtahtawa napiwah 
Ohi kiskwéwdpahwdw. 

“ tipwd numuya kwayask kitstén, dh-kiyokat akimaw dh-nipahat 1!” 
itik utékimamah. 

“ kispin dkah kath-nipahak., apihta-tipiska k dsay kah-nipahik 5 é-wih- 

. nipshiak, k-bh-pdy-iytuhtal," itéh; “ méatsikotitan ntunikd, pikw itah 

aan uernaskimulixihk wasikanihk, mikw itah ka-miskin mohkum~- 
Gnah,” iti 


nwh ntunikdw ; .uskutikayihk utasikaniyihk: mihtsdt mohkumanah 
mikkam . 


“ dkwah tapw de dnth kipimatsihin 1" itik ulokimarnah, 


ékwah wayawthtahdwak ; niawi~pakastawihwawak kahkiyaw mitataht 
kimutiskah, ‘ 


dkusi wiy awoke pdyak Gtayohkdwin nikisihtan. 


ad 


off they came to great mountain; they arrived there at the mountain. < ‘%. 
Then he removed a large’ rock from an opening. -‘The boy went in there. “’ 4,* 
It was very dark; there was on] “a, faint light. Then the other closed the « *: * 
door on him. , 


He could not 
a ring nad slipped on his finger. 


ing. 
fail of nothing, ** he said to the boy. 


will give you a good one for it.” 


o 
343 


Once upon a time there was a large town.. And 4 certain poor little 


French boy there was, who used to walk about the town, trying to find 
something to eat. Then at one time, as he came home after dark, while 
he was there in his house, in came.an Englishman who was dreased like | 
@ lor 
- “My son,”’ said this man to him; “I have come to fetch you; I have 
only just found out that you are alive,” he told him. 
' Then he urged the boy’s mother: (‘Sister-in-taw,” that Eriglishtnan 
said to her, ‘will you give me our boy to Jbring up?” - 


“Yes, ” she answered. 
He gave her much money. So he ook the boy away with him. Far 


“Just you bring that thing over there, boy, that lamp!” 

The boy took it. He went to the door. ' 
“Hand me it! wai you will come out;. first give me the lamp!” ; 
IY; 


he said to the boy. 


“No,” said the | ‘You will lock me in.’ 
Then, “Hurry ip and hand it to me!’ . 


At last that/Iinglishman got angry. . He locked the boy in the HAVE. 
@ anything. Presently he rubbed his hand and foungf that 


“HT re to go out.” 


“ 18 it, you who are my master?” the ring asked him. 
A 
“s eak thus: ‘Six door, go open! Say that, boy,” it told him. 


en the boy, “Six door, go open!” | 
Thereupon it opened. The hoy went out. He hdd a lamp. And that 
ring al 


ways talked to him. Then he went from there, homeward. . When _ 


e reached. home, he told his mother the tale. 


“Now give me something to wipe off my lamp,” he told her. ifs 
She gave him eet ae -he wiped it. 

“What do you desif®, you who are my master?” a giant asked him. 
He frightened him, coming out of the lamp. . 
“That you build me a very fine house,” he told him. - 

“Very well,”’ said the other to him. 

Then while they slept he had already finished it, and very beautiful 


A 


it was.” The boy took good care-of the lamp. 


“Whenever you desire no matter what, you will rub this lamp a 
No matter where I am, when you bid it, I shall be there. You 


Then at one time, as they dwelt there, that evil English 


some ashes; "he put them into a little wooden box. -From the pattern of 
the ashes there he saw that the boy was alive and that he-had/that magic 
lamp. Then he collected beautiful lamps; he went off with4hem, to buy 
worthless Jamps wherever he came, giving good lamps in yéturn. At last 
he came to the boy. The old woman was alone at hom¢g. 


He asked her, “Haven't you perhaps some wo 


344 © 


Then, ‘There is one here; ‘I will give it to you,” said the old woman 
to him ; 

She sought it; she found it; she gave it to him. In return he gave her 
a good one. 

“This is what I want,’ said the evil thief to her. 

- Now the boy was not at home; he had left his magic lamp. Then he 
arrived. He asked his mother, ‘Where is that lamp of mine?” 

“My son,” she told him, “we have been given a good one in trade for 
that lamp of yours.” ., 

The boy was angry. Sy f 

“You have done badly. by me. This persoxyf was the one who threw 
me into the cave, this person who has cheated~you,” he told his mother. 

Then the boy went away. Presently, as he walked along and night 
fell, he went to sleep. 

When he awoke, as he stirred, “What is it you desire, you who are my 
master?” he was asked by his ring, which he had rubbed. 

“Wherever he is who stole my lamp from me, there let mevbe, ” he 
told it. 

“Very well,” it said to him. " 

When he went to sleep and again woke up, there was a house lose by. 

Then, ‘What shall I do now?” he thought. = ~~. 

Then he saw the other depart. Thereupon he went there. 

**Let me be an ant!” 

“He changed his form; he became + an ant; then in a crack of a timber 
in the roof of the house he hid. ‘He saw a young woman who was there. 
He stayed all night, waiting for the other to sleep. At last the thief went 
to sleep. Then he rubbed his ring. 

“What is it you desire, you who are my master? it asked him. 

. “This person who stole my lamp from-me you will go place across the 
sea. My lamp you will leave behind,” he told it. 

“Very well,” it answered him. - 

Then he took the magic’ lamp. 

“Let me be in our own house!” said the boy. - 

There he then always carried ‘his lamp with him; he never left it. 

Presently, there was that thief going about again, selling golden 
chains. He entered the boy’s house. The old woman was alone in the 

ouse 

“Perhaps if this thing i is here, your son will become an even greater 
man,” he told her; ‘Here in the centre of the house do you hang it up; 
and inside it do you put a stone heart; put it inside. Thus will-your house, 
be very beautiful.” 

The old woman bought it. Then the thief went away. Then the boy 

arrive 
. Then the old woman said to him, “My son, I have bought the stone 
heart that hangs there so that you may carry it ‘about with you.” 

Then the boy liked it. When night came, he rubbed the lamp. 

* “What do you want?” his lamp asked him. : 

“The stone heart that is inside the thing which hangs there,” he 

~answered, 


\ \ 

\ . 2 “ — 345 
. wf “ype ” et 

At once he gréw-ang gry. 

“T could easily kill you; that is my heart,” it aaid to the boy; “It 
was certainly that he wanted to kill you,” it told h 

So he did not do what the other had told him. 

Presently there arrived a physician. ‘An excellent- physician,” was 
said of him. The boy was ill. 

“That is the one)” the other told him, “who means to kill you; he 
will come to see you; then do you kill him,” he was told by the other. 

Soon he came to see him. He held a knife as he lay in his bed. 

“Are you sick?” the other asked him. 

“Yes,” he told him. 

Then, when the other leaned over, he stabbed him and killed him. 

“Dear me, what are you doing? You have killed the physician!’’ his 
mother said to him. 

“Oh, he was no physician!” he told her; “He was a thief,” he told her: _ 
“Because he meant to kill me is why I killed him.” 

Then they searched; in his various pockets they found a knife and ¢ a 
sword which he carried with him, and poison with which he had meant to 
poison the boy. 

Then he dwelt there. Then, at one time, in the darkness of night- 
there arrived ten men who had donkeys as their beasts of burden. One 
of them entered the house. 

_-~S'May we camp here for the night?” he asked him. 


“Yes, de;_and bring your beasts inside,” he told him. 


“No; they can stand where they are.” . 

- Accordingly, they: tied up their beasts. Then the young woman pre- 
pared a meal; she gave them food. When her guests had eaten, she washed 
the dishes. When she went to pour out the dishwater, she went to where 
the donkeys were, and there she heard someone say to her in a whisper, 
“Is it time?” 

“No,” she answered; ‘‘Soon.” 

Those donkeys were carrying none other than robbers in boxes. Then _. 
the young woman entered the house. She heated some water; she poured 
& great amount of it into a kettle with a spout. Then she took it out of 
the house. Then she opened a box. 

_ “Is it time?” the man asked her. 

“Yes,” she told him. ! 

She poured the water into the. box; she killed that robber. She 
scalded them all to death. Then she went into the house; she | went up- 
stairs to see her master. One,of.the others was still there. _~ _— 

“My lord,” she said to Wir thaster, “in former time I used to fight, 
and you shall now see how I did, in former time. I shall deck myself as for 
the fight; that is the way I shall dress.” 

“Do indeed! !’ he told his young handmaid. 

Then the young woman went downstairs; she webt, and dressed, 
Then she came upstairs. She held a sword and a knife. 

“In former time this ¥ was the way we dressed when | jwe. fought,” she 

“old them. i 


B46 


Then she walked about there, acting in various ways. Suddenly she 
knocked that man out of his senses. ° 

“Truly you are not doing right, to kill this lord who is our guest 
her master said to her. 

“If I had not killed him, by midnight he would have killed you; in 
order to kill you was why he came here,” she told him; “Just go and look. 
Ieverywhere in his coat, in his pockets, in his stockings, everywhere you 

_will find knives,” she told him. 

“Now really you have saved my life!” her master said to her. 

Then they took the man’s body out of the house; they went and 
threw all ten of the robbers into the water. 

And so I have finished this one sacred story. 


oy 


e 


we, 


o 


